Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 18 March 2020
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM (by video), Wendy Craik AM (by video), Ian Harper (by video), Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO(by video), Catherine Tanna (by video)
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Bradley Jones (Head, InternationalDepartment), David Jacobs (Deputy Head, International Markets and Relations, InternationalDepartment)
Recent Developments
In a special meeting convened to consider options for monetary policy responses to the economiceffectsof the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), members commenced their discussion with a review ofrecentdevelopments. The outbreak was noted as first and foremost a public health issue. Many countrieswereshutting their borders and placing restrictions on businesses and individuals to slow the spreadofCOVID-19. This was causing very significant disruption to economies around the world.
Financial markets had been very volatile and there had been sharp falls in the prices of riskyassetsas market participants struggled to price the risks, given their unprecedented nature. Equityprices inthe advanced economies, including in Australia, had fallen by around 30 per cent. Thefallshad been broadly based across sectors, although equity prices in the energy and tourism sectorshadfallen particularly sharply. The equity prices of banks had also fallen significantly, althoughit wasrecognised that the capital and liquidity positions of banks had been strengthened over thepriordecade.
Liquidity in credit and money markets was very poor and the market for corporate bond issuancewasessentially closed to all but the very highest quality borrowers. Credit spreads in corporatebondmarkets had widened substantially, particularly for high-yield bonds, increasing funding costsforcorporations. Members noted that any further widening in spreads would translate directly intohigherborrowing costs, since government bond yields had very little further room to fall. Yields inmoneymarkets had also risen, although banks and highly rated non-financial corporations were stillable toaccess these markets. The Australian banks had strong funding positions and did not need tosourceadditional funding from bond markets in the near term.
Government bond markets had displayed signs of dysfunction, with many participants seeking toliquidatetheir portfolios. This had also affected traditionally safe and liquid markets, such as the USTreasurymarket. The increase in yields and volatility partly reflected the unwinding of highly leveragedpositions, and the constrained ability of dealers to absorb additional bonds after havingreachedleverage and capital constraints. The dysfunction in the US Treasury market had spread widely, given itsimportant role as a pricing benchmark for the global financial system.
In foreign exchange markets, large repatriation flows had supported the yen, and the US dollarhadappreciated against most other currencies. Members observed that the Australian dollar haddepreciatedagainst the US dollar by around 10 per cent over the preceding month, to be atits lowestlevel since 2002. Among other advanced economies, the exchange rates of commodity exporters suchasNorway, Canada and New Zealand had also depreciated notably. Capital flight had been evidentacrossemerging markets, with exchange rates depreciating against the US dollar and sovereign bondyieldsmoving sharply higher.
In response to these developments, a number of major central banks had made sizable interest ratereductions at unscheduled meetings. The Federal Reserve had cut its policy rate by 100 basispointsafter an earlier cut of 50 basis points. The Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and theReserveBank of New Zealand had each lowered policy rates to ¼ per cent, and interestrates werelower than this in Japan and Europe.
Central banks had expanded their standard open market operations to provide short-term liquiditytofinancial institutions, including by lengthening the terms on which liquidity is extended. TosupportAustralian financial markets, the Bank had injected liquidity through its open marketoperations, increasing Exchange Settlement (ES) balances from around $2.5 billion to $14 billion.The Bankhad also announced that it would be conducting daily operations at one- and three-month termsandregular repurchase operations on terms of six months or longer. In a number of jurisdictions, includingin Australia, central banks had stated that they would purchase government bonds in secondarymarkets tosupport their smooth functioning.
Members noted that many central banks were introducing additional measures to support marketfunctioning and promote the resumption of activity in corporate credit markets. The FederalReserve hadintroduced a commercial paper funding facility to provide a backstop for the market. The Bank ofEngland, acting as agent for the UK Treasury, had announced that it would purchase unlimitedamounts ofcommercial paper issued by non-financial firms with an investment grade credit rating. The BankofEngland and the European Central Bank had expanded funding schemes to encourage banks to lend tobusinesses. There had also been an easing of bank regulatory requirements in many countries.
The Federal Reserve, in conjunction with a number of other central banks, had also lowered thecost andextended the terms of foreign currency borrowing through foreign exchange swap lines. This wasdesignedto alleviate the very high demand for US dollars from non-US entities that had issued debtinUS dollars that needed to be refinanced.
Members discussed how these developments and the rapidly changing situation were affecting theoutlookfor economic activity. The immediate outlook for the Australian and global economies was highlyuncertain, but members viewed it as very likely that most countries would experience a verysharpcontraction in economic activity. Members considered the information available for the Chineseeconomy, which indicated that there had been a large contraction in economic activity in the Marchquarter. Someindicators, such as coal usage, suggested that economic activity in China was beginning to pickup, although it was too early to assess the extent to which activity would recover in the Junequarter.
While it was not possible to provide an updated set of forecasts for the economy given thefluidity ofthe situation, it was likely that Australia would experience a very material contraction ineconomicactivity, which would spread across the March and June quarters and potentially longer. The sizeof thefall in economic activity would depend on the extent of the social distancing requirements, andpotential lockdowns, put in place to contain the virus. The composition of consumption waschangingconsiderably, with spending at supermarkets and pharmacies increasing substantially, whilespending onhospitality and other services was falling sharply. Many service industries were being severelydisrupted, with significant spillovers across the economy. There were likely to be significantjoblosses over the months ahead, although the extent of this would depend on the capacity ofbusinesses toretain employees during this period. At the same time, some industries were employing moreworkers, particularly those involved in the retail supply chain and delivering goods. In time, followingcontainment of COVID-19, the economy is expected to recover, but the timing of this wasuncertain.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
Following their review of recent developments in financial markets and the implications foreconomicactivity, members turned to how monetary policy could most effectively support the Australianeconomythrough the challenging period that lay ahead.
Members acknowledged that the primary response to the COVID-19 outbreak was to managepeople's health, but that other arms of policy, including monetary and fiscal policy, wouldplay animportant role in reducing the economic and financial disruption. Members noted the measuresthat theBank had taken to support the Australian economy and operation of financial markets over thedayspreceding the meeting.
The Governor proposed a package of policy measures, which together would assist in supporting theAustralian economy through the period ahead. The focus of the package was on ensuring thatfunding costswere low across the entire economy and that credit remained available to businesses andhouseholds. Thiswould help build the necessary bridge to the economic recovery and support that recovery oncetheCOVID-19 outbreak is contained.
The elements of the package were discussed in turn.
1. A further reduction in the cash rate target to 0.25 per cent.
The proposed cut in the cash rate to 0.25 per cent would bring the cumulative declineoverthe preceding year to 1¼ percentage points. Members noted that this would be asubstantialeasing of monetary policy, which, to date, had been boosting the cash flow of businesses and thehousehold sector as a whole and also helping trade-exposed industries through the exchange ratechannel.Members acknowledged that very low interest rates have uneven effects and negative consequencesfor somepeople – especially those relying on interest income – but the evidence was thatlowerinterest rates were benefiting the community as a whole.
Members supported the proposal and agreed that the cash rate would not be increased from itslowerlevel until progress is made towards full employment and there is confidence that inflation willbesustainably within the 2–3 per target cent range. Given this, it was consideredlikely thatthe cash rate would remain at a very low level for an extended period. Members also agreed thatthe cashrate was now at its effective lower bound. Members had no appetite for negative interest ratesinAustralia.
2. A target for the yield on 3-year Australian Government bonds of around 0.25 per cent.
Members considered a proposal to extend and complement the longstanding approach to target thecashrate, which forms the anchor point for the risk-free term structure, by also targeting arisk-freeinterest rate further out along the yield curve. The specific proposal was to target the rate atthethree-year mark, given its importance as a benchmark rate in financial markets and its role infundingacross much of the Australian economy. Such a target would also be consistent with theexpectation thatthe cash rate would remain at a very low level for several years.
Members supported the intent of the proposal and agreed that it would make most sense, includingfrom acommunication perspective, to set the target at the same rate as the target for the cash rate, namely25 basis points. They acknowledged that the target did not need to be achieved preciselyevery day.Members noted that some time might be needed before yields would fall to the target from theirlevelover the weeks preceding the meeting – of around 45 basis points. Members discussedtheimportance of the Bank's communication focusing on how this target would both support theeconomyin the immediate period and assist with a strong recovery once the COVID-19 outbreak hasbeencontained.
Members noted that the yield target would be achieved by regular auctions in the secondary bondmarket, whereby the Bank would implement a program to purchase bonds of different maturities, given thehighlevel of substitutability between bonds. The Bank would also be prepared to buy semi-governmentsecurities to achieve the target and help facilitate the smooth functioning of the bond market, andwould work closely with the Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) and stategovernmentborrowing authorities. Members noted that, although the program of bond purchases would entailanincrease in the size of the Bank's balance sheet, the focus of the program would be on bondyieldsrather than the quantity and timing of bond purchases. The objective of this component of theproposedpolicy measures would be to add to the downward pressure on funding costs for financialinstitutions, households and businesses.
Members thought it likely that the target for three-year yields would be maintained untilprogress wasmade towards the Bank's goals of full employment and the inflation target. Furthermore, theyexpressed the view that it would be appropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rateitselfwas raised.
3. A term funding facility for the banking system, with particular support for credit to smallandmedium-sized businesses.
The proposed scheme had two broad objectives. The first was to lower funding costs for the entirebanking system to ensure a low cost of credit to households and businesses. This objective wouldcomplement the target for the three-year bond yield. The second objective was to provide anincentivefor lenders to support credit to businesses, especially small and medium-sized businesses.Membersagreed that this aspect would be vital as many small businesses would be likely to findretaining staffin the period ahead extremely challenging.
Under the proposed facility, the Bank would provide a three-year funding facility to authoriseddeposit-taking institutions (ADIs) at a fixed rate of 0.25 per cent, which wassubstantiallybelow lenders' current funding costs. ADIs would be able to obtain initial funding of up to3 per cent of their existing outstanding credit until the end of September 2020, andwouldhave access to additional funding if they increased lending to businesses, especially to smallandmedium-sized businesses, with these funds able to be drawn upon until the end of March 2021.This sizeof the proposed facility was at least $90 billion. Members endorsed the proposal that noadditionalallowance be available to finance growth in lending for housing.
Members expressed support for the proposed scheme and discussed some technical aspects. Theynoted thatinstitutions accessing the scheme would need to provide eligible collateral to the Bank, withhaircutsapplying to provide appropriate risk mitigation. The interest rate that would apply would befixed forthe term of the funding, which was consistent with the Bank's expectation that the cashrate waslikely to stay at a very low level for some time. Members also agreed that including a penaltyrate tocounteract the risk of a reduction in lending could act as a disincentive for institutions toparticipate in the scheme. The Governor indicated that the first drawings under the facilitywould bepossible no later than four weeks from the date of the meeting.
The Governor informed members that he understood that the Australian Prudential RegulationAuthority(APRA) would support ADIs using the scheme. In addition, the Australian Government was in theprocess ofdeveloping a complementary program of support for the non-bank financial sector, small lendersand thesecuritisation market, which would be implemented by the AOFM. Members observed that suchsupport wouldbe important to assist non-bank financial institutions and small lenders to continue to providecreditto households and businesses.
4. Exchange settlement (ES) balances at the Reserve Bank to be remunerated at 10 basispoints, rather than zero as would have been the case under the previous arrangements.
The Governor outlined the implications of the proposed policy measures for the cash market. Theexisting ‘corridor system’ means that the balances financial institutions hold withtheReserve Bank overnight earn an interest rate 25 basis points below the cash rate, and inthe eventthat a financial institution needed to borrow from the Reserve Bank overnight, it would becharged25 basis points above the cash rate. Should the cash rate be reduced to 25 basispoints, theinterest rate on ES balances would be zero. In view of the significant increase in the balancesheld inES accounts resulting from the combined effect of the Bank's enhanced liquidity operations, bondpurchases and the term funding program, maintaining a zero interest rate on these balances wouldincrease the costs to the banking system.
Members agreed that such an outcome would be undesirable in the current environment. Theyendorsed theproposal to alleviate this cost by increasing the rate of interest on settlement balances to10 basis points. No change to the arrangements for the top of the corridor were proposed.Membersnoted that the increase in ES balances would be likely to change the way that the cash marketoperates.In particular, large increases in ES balances could result in the cash rate drifting below thetarget astransaction volumes in the cash market decline, as had occurred in other countries in similarcircumstances.
In considering the overall package of measures that had been discussed, members acknowledged thattheterm funding scheme and the three-year bond yield target were both significant policydevelopments thatwould not have been under consideration in normal times. Nonetheless, members strongly supportedtheproposed policy response as a comprehensive package to complement the fiscal response announcedbygovernments in Australia in the preceding week or so.
Members endorsed the continuation of close policy coordination that had been taking place amongtheBank, the federal and state governments and government agencies. They expressed the view that, in theBank's communication, it would be important to emphasise that the Bank expected a recoveryonce theCOVID-19 outbreak has been contained, and that the recovery would be supported by the lowcost offunding across the economy.
The Decision
The Board agreed on a package of measures, comprising four elements, namely:
a reduction in the cash rate to 0.25 per centa target of 0.25 per cent for the yield on 3-year Australian government bondsa term funding facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small and medium-sizedbusinessesan adjustment to the interest rate, to be 10 basis points, on ES balances held byfinancialinstitutions at the Bank.
The measures would be announced in a media release at 2.30 pm AEDT the following afternoon, 19 March, following processes to ensure coordination of related policy announcements byAPRA andthe AOFM. The Governor would provide further elaboration and take questions at a pressconference to beheld at the Bank at 4.00 pm AEDT on the same day.