Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 1 August 2023
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Iain Ross AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others participating
Marion Kohler (Acting Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Tom Rosewall (Acting Head, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Acting Deputy Secretary)
David Jacobs (Head, RBA Future Hub), Penelope Smith (Head, International Department), Carl Schwartz(Acting Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that headline inflation had declinedfurther in most advanced economies, by a little more than expected in some cases, and that this hadlargely been led by energy prices over the prior year. However, core inflation remained well above therates consistent with central banks’ targets and was proving to be persistent. While labour marketconditions were gradually easing, conditions remained tight and unemployment rates were still at very lowlevels. Furthermore, members noted that wages growth remained above levels that would be consistent withmany central banks’ inflation targets. While some portion of this may reflect a one-time correctionto wage levels, and high wages growth could be partially offset by a contraction in profit margins orfaster productivity growth, members noted that slower growth in wages was likely to be required forinflation to return to target. Many central banks in advanced economies still expected inflation to be ator close to their targets by the end of 2025.
Growth in advanced economies had slowed in response to tighter monetary policy and cost-of-livingpressures, but not by as much as expected in some cases. While growth in the manufacturing sector hadslowed in preceding months, services sector activity had been relatively resilient. The post-pandemicrecovery in consumption had been notably stronger in the United States and Canada. More recently, consumption growth had slowed in many advanced economies. Members noted that there were some indicationsthat households’ real disposable incomes and wealth were starting to increase, as inflation declinedand housing prices stabilised or began to rise in a number of countries.
In China, the economic recovery had been weaker than expected after the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions at the end of 2022. In the June quarter, weak externaldemand had weighed on export growth and there was a further deterioration in conditions in the propertymarket, placing additional pressure on financially stressed developers. By contrast, householdconsumption had continued to recover in the quarter, though it remained below its pre-pandemic trend.Inflation remained very low by global standards and relative to the authorities’ target.
Members noted that the outlook for the Chinese economy had been revised lower and was subject to a highdegree of uncertainty. The outlook depended on how the recovery in household consumption evolved, and thescale and effectiveness of policy support, particularly in the property sector. Authorities had recentlysignalled a more positive stance on support for the property sector, but the extent of the shift wasuncertain, and authorities continued to emphasise the containment of risks. Iron ore prices had increasedin response to an expectation of further targeted stimulus for the property sector. By contrast, thermalcoal prices had declined, partly because of weak industrial demand in China.
Members observed that growth in Australia’s major trading partners was expected to be lower thanforecast in May, at around 3¼ per cent in 2023 and 3 per cent in 2024 – wellbelow the pre-pandemic longer run average. The downgrade partly reflected the revision to the outlook forChina. Members considered the key uncertainties around the outlook. These included that advancedeconomies might need to tighten policy further if inflation pressures persist, and that there could bespillover effects if the Chinese economy were to be weaker than forecast. On the other hand, the recentrun of data on activity – especially for North America – had surprised on the upside, andpolicy support could lift the outlook for the Chinese economy.
Domestic economic conditions
Turning to the domestic economy, members observed that consumer price inflation had eased by more thanexpected in the June quarter and had continued to decline from its peak at the end of 2022. Nonetheless, members acknowledged that inflation remained high and broadly based. Headline inflation was0.9 per cent in the June quarter in seasonally adjusted terms and 6 per cent inyear-ended terms. Goods price inflation had eased further in the quarter, and by more than expected, particularly for consumer durables. This was consistent with easing global cost pressures, alongsideslowing growth in domestic demand. However, progress in reducing inflation had been uneven across goodscategories, with grocery prices inflation (excluding fruit and vegetables) remaining high in the quarter.Services price inflation – especially for market services – had also remained high. And rentinflation had picked up further, to an annualised rate of around 10 per cent in the Junequarter.
Trimmed mean inflation in the June quarter was 6 per cent in year-ended terms – well abovethe inflation target but down from its peak at the end of 2022. The monthly inflation indicator alsopointed to a continued decline in inflationary pressures through the quarter. The share of CPI itemswhose prices had increased faster than 3 per cent on an annualised basis had declined butremained above its pre-pandemic average.
Members observed that the updated staff inflation forecasts were little changed from those presented tothe Board in May, and the forecast period had been extended to the end of 2025. Headline inflation wasforecast to be around 3¼ per cent at the end of 2024 and back within the 2–3 per cent target range in late 2025. This forecast wasbased on a higher profile for the cash rate over the forecast period than three months prior, reflecting, among other things, increases in the cash rate in both May and June.
The easing in goods price inflation was expected to drive the decline in inflation over the year ahead. Bycontrast, domestic cost pressures arising from still-high levels of demand combined with ongoingtightness in the labour market and energy costs were expected to see inflationary pressures persist forsome time. This would be particularly evident in services price inflation. The forecast for rentinflation had been revised up a little for the year ahead as higher-than-expected population growth hadadded demand to an already tight rental market.
Turning to wages, members noted that timely indicators of wages growth were steady at around 3½ to4 per cent in the June quarter. Wages growth – as measured by the Wage Price Index– was expected to increase in the second half of 2023 because of ongoing tightness in the labourmarket, increases in award and minimum wages, and developments in public sector wages. Importantly, however, the forecasts were predicated on labour productivity growth returning to its pre-pandemic trendover coming years, which would be needed for the expected growth in labour costs to be consistent withthe inflation target.
Labour market conditions remained tight, but a little less so than in late 2022. The unemployment rate hadremained at 3½ per cent in June and had been around that level for a year. Employment hadincreased in line with the strong rate of population growth, keeping the employment-to-population ratioat its record high. Members noted that the population level was still a little below its pre-pandemictrend but that it had grown by more than anticipated, partly due to unexpectedly high numbers ofinternational students. Meanwhile, hiring intentions of firms in the Bank’s liaison program hadeased and firms had reported an improvement in labour availability in some sectors, partly supported bythe arrival of foreign workers. The staff forecast was for the unemployment rate to increase to reach4½ per cent by late 2024.
Members observed that the economy was expected to grow well below its trend pace over 2023 ascost-of-living pressures and higher interest rates weigh on demand. Growth in output was forecast toincrease, albeit only gradually, over the remainder of the forecast period, supported by an easing ofthese headwinds and a pick-up in household wealth following the turnaround in the housing market.Year-ended GDP growth was expected to trough at 1 per cent at the end of 2023, before graduallypicking up to around 2¼ per cent by the end of 2025. The near-term outlook was more subduedthan it had been in May, with GDP per capita having declined in the March quarter.
Timely indicators suggested that household consumption growth remained subdued in the June quarter.Members discussed the decline in retail sales in the month of June, noting that this had followed acomparable increase in sales in May, with the timing of promotional activity contributing to the monthlyvariability. More broadly, the value of monthly retail sales had been essentially unchanged sinceSeptember 2022. Growth in household consumption had slowed considerably over the prior year, consistentwith developments in aggregate household real income and wealth. Members noted, however, that behind theaggregate picture was a diversity of experience among individual households as high inflation and higherinterest rates worked their way through the economy. That said, disaggregated data on spending growthpointed to a common driver – that high inflation is eroding real incomes – and that this isplaying an important role in the slowdown in aggregate consumption growth. Nonetheless, consumptionoutcomes for some mortgagors and renters were judged likely to be considerably weaker than the aggregate, since some of these households face acute financial challenges.
National housing prices had increased over prior months because of the combined effects of stronger demandand limited supply. Members noted that strong population growth had lifted demand for rental properties, as had a decline in the number of residents per dwelling since the start of the pandemic. Adding to this, households were able to pay more for housing because of strong nominal income growth. Rental vacancyrates had remained low across all capital cities, supporting strong growth in rents.
Construction activity continued to be limited by capacity constraints and a tightening in financialconditions. Cash flow constraints and an increase in insolvencies could create further delays incompletions for some projects. Demand for new residential construction had been relatively weak but thestaff forecasts were for this to pick up over coming years. Non-mining business investment in machineryand equipment had grown strongly in the March quarter and was expected to remain at a high level for sometime. Export volumes were expected to grow modestly over the forecast period, driven by internationalstudent numbers growing at robust pre-pandemic rates and the ongoing recovery in international tourism.
International financial markets
Members noted that market participants’ expectations for central banks’ policy rates were littlechanged over July, having increased over May and June. The stabilisation of policy rate expectationsmainly reflected lower-than-expected inflation data in several advanced economies, even as labour marketsremained very tight. The US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Canada raisedpolicy rates further in July, as expected, and market participants had not fully priced in further policyrate increases. In the United Kingdom, markets were pricing in at least one more rate increase.
Government bond yields had declined in some countries over July but generally remained higher than a fewmonths prior, reflecting an expectation that central banks would hold policy rates at higher levels forlonger. Meanwhile, market-implied measures of longer term inflation expectations for advanced economiesgenerally remained consistent with central banks’ inflation targets. In Japan, yields on 10-yeargovernment bonds had increased following the Bank of Japan’s decision to amend the parameters of itsyield curve control policy. Market-implied measures of longer term inflation expectations had increasedfor Japan but were still below the 2 per cent inflation target.
Over the month, equity prices had increased further and corporate bond spreads had narrowed. However, corporate bond issuance had declined over the prior year and intermediated credit growth had slowed inresponse to the substantial tightening of monetary policies. In China, equity prices and bond yields hadrisen a little from recent lows, in response to the prospect of further policy stimulus.
The Australian dollar had been little changed over the month on a trade-weighted basis. The exchange ratehad appreciated earlier in the month, although concerns around the outlook for the Chinese economy anddomestic economic data – including lower-than-expected inflation – had weighed on theexchange rate later in July.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that market expectations for the path of the cash rate implied by money market rates haddeclined since the July meeting, as had market economists’ expectations. The decision to leave thecash rate unchanged in July had come as a surprise to some market participants. Expectations forincreases in the cash rate had also declined following lower-than-expected June quarter CPI data and, toa lesser extent, weaker-than-expected June retail sales data.
Scheduled mortgage payments as a share of household disposable income increased to 9.4 per centin the June quarter, around its historical peak. Members noted that banks had continued passing increasesin the cash rate through to their customers, and that outstanding mortgage rates and scheduled mortgagepayments were set to increase further as a high share of fixed-rate loans roll onto higher rates throughthe rest of 2023. Voluntary principal payments into borrowers’ offset and redraw accounts declinedin the June quarter. Net flows into these accounts had declined to be noticeably lower than thepre-pandemic average, consistent with pressures on disposable incomes.
Credit growth had declined over the year to June, as expected given the tightening of monetary policy, although it had stabilised more recently. Housing credit growth had been supported by an increase inhousing loan commitments since February, alongside the increase in housing prices.
Business credit growth had also stabilised, having slowed over the prior year, but lending to smallbusinesses had been little changed for several years. Members discussed insights from the Bank’sannual small business finance panel, which had convened in July. While some panellists had sought financeto meet operating costs, others were hesitant to take on new debt given the economic uncertainties andhigher cost of finance. Longstanding challenges for small businesses in accessing finance from banksremained, including rigid collateral requirements and onerous application processes. Several panellistshad turned to non-traditional sources of finance, such as private equity and non-bank finance, althoughthe aggregate value of these types of funding remained modest compared with bank lending.
Members noted that market pricing implied a one-in-three chance of a 25 basis point increase in thecash rate at the August meeting, with a 25 basis point increase fully priced in by the end of 2023.Around one in two market economists expected a rate increase at this meeting but the median view was alsofor only one further rate rise this year. The expectation from both market pricing and the median ofmarket economists’ forecasts was that a 25 basis point increase would bring rates to their peakfor the current tightening phase.
Considerations for monetary policy
In turning to the policy decision, members noted that the data released over the prior month signalled theeconomy was still on the narrow path in which inflation returns to target while employment and theeconomy continue to grow. The staff’s revised central forecasts also had the economy continuing onthat path. However, risks remained on both sides of the forecasts, including plausible scenarios in whichinflation takes longer to return to target than members considered acceptable.
Members noted that the information received on inflation over the prior month had been reassuring.Inflation had fallen further and been a little lower than expected in the June quarter. However, membersobserved that there had not yet been any material slowing in services price inflation, and the experienceglobally had been that services price inflation was more persistent than expected. Members also notedthat inflation for some services (including rent and insurance) may rise further, given those items’historical patterns of persistence and the current conditions in these markets.
Members observed that the labour market had continued to show considerable resilience. The unemploymentrate was very low and had remained around 3½ per cent for a full year. However, there were somesigns that the labour market was at a turning point, including a small rise in the underemployment rate.More generally, members noted signs that the substantial rise in interest rates over the prior year wasconstraining demand, including in the retail sector, where the value of sales had not grown for sometime.
Members considered the implications of the staff’s forecasts. These forecasts were little changedfrom three months earlier and remained consistent with the economy staying on the narrow path that theBoard is seeking to navigate. Members noted the conditioning assumption for the cash rate underlyingthese forecasts was higher than it had previously been, given the increases in May and June.
Members then turned to a consideration of the risks surrounding these forecasts. They noted that thesewere broadly balanced, but that the costs associated with these risks might be asymmetric – inparticular, it would be costly if a sustained period of high inflation led to higher inflationexpectations.
Members discussed a range of scenarios for inflation, including the possibility that inflation does notreturn to the target band by around mid-2025. This could occur if services price inflation declines moreslowly than forecast, the recovery in productivity growth incorporated into the forecasts does noteventuate or if wages growth is more responsive to the tight labour market than assumed. On the otherhand, inflation could fall faster than anticipated if the decline in real household disposable incomeover the prior year weighs more heavily on consumption. More broadly, members noted the lags in theoperation of monetary policy meant that the full effects of the 400 basis points of monetary policytightening over the prior year were yet to be felt. Accordingly, members acknowledged the significantuncertainty about the economic outlook.
In light of these observations, members considered two options for monetary policy at this meeting:raising the cash rate by a further 25 basis points; or holding the cash rate steady.
The case to raise the cash rate centred on the risk that inflation might prove to be more persistent thancurrently forecast. Members observed that, were this to occur, it would require the Board to raise thecash rate by more than otherwise to get inflation back to target, making it very difficult to preservethe gains made in employment over prior years. Raising the cash rate at this meeting would help tomitigate the risk of that undesirable scenario eventuating. In addition, members noted that thestaff’s forecasts were already conditioned on a further increase in the cash rate and that the cashrate was notably lower than policy rates in other countries, despite inflation in Australia being atleast as high. Finally, members observed that the resumption of growth in housing prices could be asignal that financial conditions were not as tight as they had assessed.
On the other hand, the arguments for keeping the cash rate unchanged at this meeting centred on theobservation that the Board had already tightened monetary policy significantly, there were signs thatthis was working as intended and the Board had time to wait and see how the economy evolves. Membersnoted that the full effects of the earlier tightening were yet to be recorded in the data. Even so, consumption had already slowed significantly, there were early signs that the labour market might be at aturning point and inflation was heading in the right direction. Considering this and the forecasts, members observed that there was a credible path back to the inflation target with the cash rate stayingat its present level. This path was broadly in line with the staff’s central forecasts.
Members agreed that the argument to leave the cash rate unchanged at this meeting was the stronger one.They noted that the recent information on inflation had been encouraging, the economy was expected togrow only slowly over the period ahead and this would help with the further moderation of inflation. Atthe same time, members agreed that it was possible that some further tightening of monetary policy mightbe required to ensure that inflation returns to target in a reasonable timeframe. Whether or not afurther increase in interest rates is required would depend on the data and the evolving assessment ofrisks. In making its decisions over the months ahead, the Board will continue to pay close attention todevelopments in the global economy, trends in household spending, and the outlook for inflation and thelabour market. Members reaffirmed their determination to return inflation to target within a reasonabletimeframe and their willingness to do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
The decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 4.1 per cent, and the interest rate onExchange Settlement balances at 4 per cent.