Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 1 December 2020
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Tony Richards (Head, Payments Policy Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment)
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), for the paper on the future of money
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that some potential COVID-19 vaccines were reported as having a high efficacy rate and were nearingapproval for emergency use in the United States, United Kingdom and the European Union. It was notedthat should these vaccines prove effective in practice and be made widely available on a timely basis, this would reduce downside risks to the medium-term economic outlook.
Nevertheless, infections had risen notably in a number of large advanced economies since September.Hospitalisation rates had exceeded earlier peaks in many countries, and stress was being placed on somehealthcare systems. Many governments had responded by tightening containment measures, including there-introduction of full or partial lockdowns. This had contributed to a welcome reduction in the flowof new cases in Europe in recent weeks, while in the United States, where restrictions had been lessstringent, numbers of new cases were yet to slow appreciably.
Members noted that global economic activity had bounced back faster than anticipated in the Septemberquarter, but the tightening in containment measures in the December quarter had resulted in a loss ofeconomic momentum. In Europe, some economies were now expected to contract in the December quarter.Members observed that, once most restrictions were lifted, the level of GDP in many economies hadtended to recover to around 4 to 5 per cent below pre-pandemic levels. This sizeableshortfall reflected the remaining restrictions on some services industries as well as risk aversion andcost-cutting by firms, which had weighed on employment and investment.
In Asia, differences in the industry composition of economies explained some of the variation inrecovery paths. Economies with large automotive industries had experienced a slower recovery inindustrial production, compared with those whose exports of technology and electronics are moreimportant. It was also noted that the composition of fiscal stimulus in China had contributed to thevery strong rebound in industrial production there.
Members noted that housing prices in a number of advanced economies had been surprisingly resilientthis year, and some economies had seen a notable increase in housing prices in recent months. NewZealand had experienced strong ongoing housing demand from population growth, expatriate buyinginterest and an earlier easing in lending standards. By comparison, these factors had been lessrelevant in Australia and, partly as a result, the increase in housing prices in Australia this yearhad been considerably smaller than in a number of other advanced economies.
Members discussed how global developments had affected Australian trade since the pandemic. Early inthe pandemic, weak external demand had depressed exports, while supply disruptions had affected imports(as they had in a number of economies). The imposition by Chinese authorities of import bans and otherobstacles to imports of some Australian products, particularly agricultural products and, morerecently, coal, had also had an effect. However, it was also noted that Chinese demand for Australianiron ore exports remained firm.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that the recovery had established reasonable momentum, aided by the lifting of restrictions in Victoria. Expectations for GDP growth in the September andDecember quarters had been upgraded over the preceding month, and employment had also recovered fasterthan anticipated. At the same time, members noted that there continued to be a significant amount ofspare capacity in the labour market and the economy more generally. The recovery was still expected tobe uneven and protracted, with inflation remaining low. Substantial policy support would therefore berequired for a considerable period.
In reviewing recent data, members noted that the rebound in household consumption was well under wayand evolving broadly as expected following a record contraction in the June quarter. A bounce-back inspending in Victoria had assisted this, consistent with more consumption possibilities opening up inthat state. Indicators such as retail trade, new car sales and payments information indicated that therecovery in consumption would continue in the December quarter; high household savings was also likelyto support consumption in the period ahead. At the same time, the ability of households to consume someservices would continue to be constrained by pandemic-related restrictions. By the end of the year thelevel of consumption was still expected to be lower than a year earlier, in line with the experience ofsome other economies.
Members noted that conditions in the domestic housing market were improving but uneven. Regionalhousing prices had increased by more than those in capital cities since the onset of the pandemic.There was also considerable variation in changes in housing prices across the capital cities, withconditions in Sydney and Melbourne more subdued than elsewhere in the country. In addition, withinSydney and Melbourne in particular, conditions in the detached housing market were firmer than forhigher-density markets. Overall, national housing prices had increased only a little since the outbreakof the pandemic.
Members agreed that an important factor in national housing market conditions had been the slowdownin population growth as a result of the closure of international borders; this had been moreconsequential in Australia than in many other economies. Members discussed how the decline in netoverseas migration had affected conditions in the rental market in particular, with rents falling andrental vacancy rates in inner-city Sydney and Melbourne around their highest levels in many years.Rental vacancy rates were much lower in Perth, where growth in new supply had been relatively modest inrecent years and international students accounted for a smaller share of rental housing demand.
Members noted that the recovery in the labour market was more advanced than expected, with employmenthaving grown strongly in October. This was despite a tapering in the JobKeeper program and somerestrictions on activity remaining in place in Melbourne during most of the month. Victoria accountedfor around half of nationwide employment growth in October, in part because of the pick-up inemployment in construction and manufacturing in that state as restrictions began to be eased. Relatedto the stronger employment outcomes, members also noted that the rebound in the participation rate hadbeen surprisingly swift.
Despite these positive developments, members noted that the unemployment rate had ticked up in recentmonths and that broader measures of labour underutilisation remained high. Hours worked were around 4per cent lower than before the pandemic, and many employed workers were still on reduced or zerohours. The recovery in employment and average hours worked for full-time workers had been much moresubdued compared with those working part time. Members agreed that, on the whole, there was still asignificant amount of spare capacity in the labour market and that this would remain a key policychallenge for some time.
A further indication of spare capacity in the labour market was low wages growth. Members noted thatgrowth in the wage price index slowed to 0.1 per cent in the September quarter to be just1.4 per cent in year-ended terms. This was the slowest wages growth in the two-decade historyof the series. Over recent quarters, the slowdown in growth in wages set in individual agreementslargely reflected wage freezes for many private sector employees and some, mostly temporary, wagereductions. The slowdown in award wages growth in the September quarter had been even more pronouncedthan in individual agreements, in part reflecting deferred increases for many awards. Members alsoobserved that if new collective agreements (mostly enterprise bargaining agreements) were establishedat lower rates of growth than expiring agreements, this would place further downward pressure on wagesgrowth. It was noted that a substantial tightening in the labour market would be required to lift wagesgrowth and inflation outcomes over the medium term.
Members noted that non-mining business investment was expected to have declined further in theSeptember quarter and the outlook remained weak. Surveys of businesses' investment intentionsindicated that expenditure on machinery and equipment and on non-residential construction would remainweak, although not as weak as expected a few months earlier; investment in machinery and equipmentwould have declined further in the absence of policy measures designed to encourage some firms to bringforward investment. Members discussed the risk that a prolonged period of weak capital investment couldweigh on the economy's productive capacity over time.
Members concluded their discussion of domestic economic conditions by noting that the unprecedenteddegree of fiscal and monetary policy stimulus since the outbreak of the pandemic had played a key rolein supporting the economy. As part of the national fiscal response, state and territory governments hadrecently announced welcome additional increases in expenditure; this, combined with lower revenues, hadseen the consolidated state and territory budget deficit for 2020/21 increase to around 5 per cent of output. The consolidateddeficit across the Australian and state governments in 2020/21 wasexpected to be around 15 per cent of GDP, a substantial increase from 2019/20. Members agreed that national fiscal settings will provide significantsupport to the recovery in the period ahead.
International financial markets
Members observed that financial conditions were highly accommodative globally. News of progress indeveloping effective vaccines had boosted equity markets and had lowered credit risk premiums furtherduring November, notwithstanding rising COVID-19 case numbers and tighterlockdown measures in many jurisdictions.
In the advanced economies, expectations for any further reductions in central banks' policy rateshad been scaled back, partly because of upward revisions to the economic outlook and partly becauseother policy tools were providing significant stimulus and could be scaled up if needed. At its mostrecent policy meeting, the US Federal Reserve had judged that immediate adjustments to the pace andcomposition of its asset purchases had not been necessary. The European Central Bank had signalled thatit was likely to expand some of its programs at its upcoming meeting, but a further reduction in itsnegative policy rate was no longer anticipated by market participants. The Bank of England had announcedan expansion of its asset purchase program in November and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand hadintroduced a program for providing long-term loans to banks. In contrast to previous months, marketpricing had suggested that negative policy rates were unlikely to be adopted in either of these twoeconomies.
Yields on long-term government bonds in the advanced economies had risen a little in response to thepositive news on COVID-19 vaccines, but had remained at very low levels.Central bank bond buying programs had provided some offset to the effect on yields stemming from otherinfluences, including the ongoing high level of government bond issuance. Members noted that, relativeto GDP, the size of the Bank's balance sheet was at the lower end of the range observed in othercountries, although it was now rising steadily under the bond purchase program that had commenced inNovember.
Members noted that a range of asset prices had been supported by the more positive global outlook andthe very accommodative stance of monetary policy. Spreads between corporate and government bond yieldshad narrowed further. Globally, equity prices had increased strongly following the vaccine developments, rising by at least 10 per cent in many cases, including in Australia. A reduction inuncertainty following the outcome of the US election, and better-than-expected earnings reports inadvanced economies, had also supported equity prices.
Chinese government bond yields had increased and the Chinese renminbi had appreciated in recent months.Relatively higher interest rates and China's recent inclusion in some global benchmark indices hadencouraged continued inflows into Chinese bond markets. Also, Chinese authorities had continued toimprove foreign access to these markets. Reflecting the better outlook for global growth and trade, manyemerging market economies had experienced significant portfolio inflows and appreciating exchangerates.
The US dollar had depreciated during November in response to the improved medium-term outlook forglobal growth; on a trade-weighted basis it was a little below its level at the start of 2020. The samefactors had supported commodity prices and seen the Australian dollar appreciate in November; on atrade-weighted basis the exchange rate had remained around 2 per cent below its peak in earlySeptember.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that the most recent policy package had been working as expected. Money market rateshad declined to be close to zero and the yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond had fallen tolevels consistent with the Board's target, aided by the Bank purchasing $5 billion of thatbond in November. In addition, $19 billion of longer-dated government bonds had been purchasedunder the bond purchase program.
The bond purchase program had put downward pressure on bond yields and contributed to a lowerexchange rate than otherwise. Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities (AGS) had declinedrelative to 10-year government bond yields in other advanced countries in anticipation of theBank's bond purchase program. Since the announcement of the program, yields on 10-year AGS hadremained at similar levels to those on 10-year US Treasury securities. The spread of semi-governmentbond yields relative to AGS had increased a little following the release of the state governmentbudgets, but yields had remained at historically low levels. The markets for AGS and semi-governmentdebt had continued to function smoothly.
Members observed that average outstanding interest rates on housing and business loans had declinedto historic lows. Since the start of November, announcements of reductions in borrowing rates hadlargely been for fixed-rate housing loans as well as business loans under the Government'sCoronavirus Small and Medium Enterprises Guarantee Scheme. Some banks had also reduced rates on a rangeof deposit products.
Demand for housing finance had increased in recent months, particularly for loans to owner-occupiers, and credit to investors had stopped declining. Members noted that, in contrast, demand for businesscredit had remained weak and business credit had declined since May, unwinding the increase over Marchand April, when businesses had drawn on credit lines for precautionary reasons. Payments into offsetand redraw accounts had remained high in October.
The future of money
Members considered a special paper on the future of money and changes in the way payments are made.They discussed the longer-term trend towards the use of electronic payment methods by households and theapparent acceleration in this trend as a result of the pandemic. Members noted that the shift from cashto electronic payments is further advanced in Australia than in a number of other countries. However, demand for cash as a store of value had continued to grow in Australia and most other advancedeconomies.
Members discussed different possible design features for a retail central bank digital currency (CBDC)and the associated public policy issues. They noted that there has been significant innovation in theAustralian payments system in recent years, including the provision of real-time account-to-accountpayments that are available on a 24/7 basis. A retail CBDC mightassist with some particular use cases, but it could fundamentally change the structure of the financialsystem and introduce new financial stability risks. It therefore did not appear that a public policycase for a retail CBDC currently existed in Australia. Members noted that there could be strongerarguments in favour of a wholesale CBDC and that it was important for the Bank to continue to conductresearch in this area and monitor developments in other jurisdictions.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global outlook remained uncertain.Infection rates had risen sharply in Europe and the United States and the recoveries in these economieshad lost momentum or even reversed. However, the news about vaccines had been positive, which shouldsupport the recovery of the global economy. The recovery was also dependent on ongoing support from bothfiscal and monetary policy. In labour markets in most countries, hours worked were noticeably belowpre-pandemic levels. Inflation remained very low and below central bank targets.
In Australia, the economic recovery was under way and recent data had generally been better thanexpected. Consumer spending had risen as restrictions were eased, business and consumer confidence hadlifted and housing markets had generally proved resilient. Employment had been recovering strongly andthe peak in the unemployment rate was likely to be lower than the 8 per cent rate expected amonth earlier. Nevertheless, the recovery was still expected to be uneven and protracted, and itremained dependent on significant policy support and favourable health outcomes. It would take some timefor output to reach its pre-pandemic level and an extended period of high unemployment was in prospect.The high unemployment rate and excess capacity across the economy more broadly were expected to resultin subdued wages growth and inflation over coming years. Given this environment, the Board viewedaddressing the high rate of unemployment as an important national priority.
Following the significant policy changes made at the Board's recent meetings, members decided tomaintain the existing policy settings. Members agreed that the Board's policy measures had loweredinterest rates across the yield curve, which was assisting the recovery by: lowering financing costs forborrowers; contributing to a lower exchange rate than otherwise; and supporting asset prices and balancesheets. The Term Funding Facility (TFF) was also supporting the supply of credit to businesses. TheBoard's decisions were complementary to the significant steps taken by governments in Australia tosupport jobs and economic growth.
Since the start of the year, the Bank's balance sheet had increased by around $130 billion.Authorised deposit-taking institutions had drawn down $84 billion of low-cost funding through theTFF and had access to a further $105 billion under the facility. Over the preceding month, the Bankhad purchased $19 billion of government bonds under the bond purchase program and a further$5 billion of AGS in support of the 3-year yield target. The Bank remained prepared to purchasebonds in whatever quantity required to achieve the 3-year yield target. Members noted that theAustralian banking system, with its strong capital and liquidity buffers, had remained resilient and washelping the economy traverse the current difficult period.
Given the outlook for both employment and inflation, members acknowledged that monetary and fiscalsupport will be required for some time. The Board remains committed to not increasing the cash rateuntil actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. For thisto occur, wages growth would have to be materially higher than recent levels. This would requiresignificant gains in employment and a return to a tight labour market. Given the outlook, the Board doesnot expect to increase the cash rate for at least 3 years. The Board remains of the view that itwould be appropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rate itself were increased.
Members agreed to keep the size of the bond purchase program under review. At its future meetings, theBoard will closely monitor the effects of the bond purchases on the economy and on market functioning, as well as the evolving outlook for jobs and inflation. The Board is prepared to do more ifnecessary.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.1 per centan interest rate of zero on Exchange Settlement balances held by financial institutions at theBanka target of around 0.1 per cent for the yield on the 3-year Australian Governmentbondthe expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small andmedium-sized businesses, with an interest rate on new drawings of 0.1 per centthe purchase of $100 billion of government bonds of maturities of around 5 to 10 yearsover the 6 months following the Board meeting on 3 November 2020.