Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 1 February 2022
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary)
Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by noting that global economic growth hadgathered momentum in the second half of 2021, ahead of the outbreak of the Omicron variant of COVID-19. The global recovery was most progressed in advanced economies, whereactivity had returned to – or, in some cases, exceeded – its pre-pandemic level. In theseeconomies, household balance sheets and labour market conditions were strong, fiscal and monetarypolicies remained supportive and vaccination coverage was generally high. Activity across much of Asiahad also rebounded in late 2021, following the disruption of the midyear outbreak of the Delta variant.In China, economic activity had already rebounded to its pre-pandemic trajectory in 2020, although outputgrowth had been subdued by historical standards throughout most of 2021. Growth in China had picked up inthe December quarter as the drag from earlier policy tightening measures abated.
Members noted that the outlook for global output growth remained favourable, with the economies ofAustralia's major trading partners expected to grow at an above-average rate in 2022. While the rapidspread of the Omicron variant had disrupted global activity, including supply chains, the effects ondemand appeared to be less substantial than in earlier outbreaks. In most advanced economies, GDP wasforecast to return to its pre-pandemic path in 2022, and the Chinese economy was expected to continuegrowing around its pre-pandemic trend through the year. Strong growth was forecast for emerging marketeconomies in 2022, although for many this was unlikely to be sufficient to return GDP to its pre-pandemicpath.
Members noted that inflation in many economies had persisted at multi-year highs and broadened in scope inprior months to include the prices of services as well as goods as restrictions had eased. Global supplychains remained under pressure. In addition, outbreaks of COVID-19 hadcontinued to disrupt labour supply and distribution networks at a time of strong household consumption inadvanced economies. Energy and non-energy commodity prices had risen further in prior months and, in someeconomies, inventories remained low across a number of sectors, including retail. Even so, some sourcesof upstream price pressure, such as shipping costs and semiconductor prices, had stabilised or abated.Central banks had recently raised their inflation forecasts for 2022; however, most expected inflation tomoderate over the course of the coming year and had emphasised the considerable uncertainty surroundingthe outlook. Members noted that key uncertainties for the global inflation outlook included whether, andhow quickly, global consumption patterns normalise, and whether inflationary pressures ease in anenvironment of low unemployment and negative real interest rates.
Labour markets in advanced economies had continued to recover in prior months and the outlook remainedstrong. Job vacancies remained high and solid employment growth had driven unemployment rates down toaround the low levels prevailing before the onset of the pandemic. Yet outcomes for wages growth haddiffered across economies. Wages growth had picked up most sharply in the United States and the UnitedKingdom, where labour demand had been strong but participation rates had still been well belowpre-pandemic levels. In addition to paying higher wages, an increasing proportion of firms in thesecountries had been paying bonuses and offering other incentives to attract and retain employees. Bycontrast, wages growth had remained subdued in a number of countries where unemployment rates had beenlow but labour supply had largely recovered, including in the euro area, Canada and Australia.
Members concluded their discussion of international economic conditions by taking stock of upside anddownside risks to the global outlook. Much would continue to depend on health-related developments.Favourable health outcomes could result in much stronger private demand, while the emergence of a moresevere strain of COVID-19 would be expected to further disrupt supplychains, labour supply and economic activity more generally. Another risk was that the upswing in globalinflation turned out to be larger and/or more persistent than currently anticipated by central banks andmarket participants. This could trigger a significant tightening in monetary policy and global financialconditions. The complexity of medium-term policy challenges in China, together with the possibility ofbroader and more frequent lockdowns in response to COVID-19 outbreaks, meantthat risks remained skewed to the downside there. An increase in geopolitical tensions was also noted asa downside risk to the global outlook.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic conditions, members observed that the Australian economy had establishedsolid momentum prior to the Omicron outbreak. Economic activity had bounced back strongly in the Decemberquarter, led by a surge in household spending as restrictions relating to the Delta outbreak in thesecond half of 2021 were eased. Conditions in the labour market had also rebounded quickly.
Members discussed how the spread of the Omicron variant would slow growth in the March quarter, but agreedthat it was likely to have a much smaller impact on economic activity than previous waves of COVID-19. High vaccination rates in Australia and less severe health outcomesassociated with the Omicron variant had reduced the need for widespread lockdowns. As of late January, case numbers were starting to trend lower and hospitalisations appeared to have peaked. Timely measuresof household spending suggested that consumption had been relatively resilient during the outbreak. Thiswas despite a drop in mobility, which reflected the effects of illness, isolation requirements, somerestrictions on activity and people voluntarily reducing their social interaction to reduce the risk ofinfection. Hours worked, more so than employment, were expected to bear much of the adjustment to thedisruption caused by the Omicron outbreak.
GDP growth was forecast to strengthen through the middle of the year, with broad-based growth in domesticdemand sustained across the forecast period. GDP was estimated to have grown by 5 per cent over2021, and it was forecast to grow by around 4¼ per cent over 2022 and 2 per cent over2023; the resulting level of output was expected to be higher over the forecast period than had beenforecast three months earlier. Household consumption was expected to be supported by strong growth inlabour income and the large increase in household wealth over prior years. The household saving ratio wasexpected to decline over the forecast period, but remain higher than its average level in the years priorto the pandemic. Members noted that an important source of uncertainty surrounded households' use ofsavings accumulated during the pandemic and how consumption would respond to the increase in householdwealth.
Members discussed the outlook for private and public investment, which remained strong. A high level ofdwelling investment was expected to be sustained during the forecast period, reflecting a large pipelineof work. The recovery in non-mining business investment that had been under way before the Delta outbreakwas expected to continue, supported by tax incentives, strong corporate balance sheets and the broaderrecovery in demand conditions. Federal and state midyear budgets had also pointed to a stronger outlookfor public investment and public consumption than previously foreshadowed. However, information from theBank's liaison program suggested that capacity constraints – including difficulties in sourcingbuilding materials, labour shortages and planning bottlenecks – could slow the roll-out of someinvestment projects.
Turning to the outlook for the labour market, members noted that employment had recovered more quicklythan previously expected. In December, employment was higher and the unemployment rate lower thanpre-Delta levels. The unemployment rate had declined by 1 percentage point to 4.2 per centin the final two months of 2021, and underemployment had declined further to reach its lowest rate in13 years in December. Labour force participation had also rebounded to around historically highlevels.
The Omicron outbreak was expected to have caused average hours worked to decline significantly in Januaryas employees recovered from illness or self-isolated. However, employment was expected to be lessaffected. Looking beyond the near term, strong demand for labour was forecast to translate into a lowerunemployment rate, as well as a declining rate of underemployment as firms boosted the working hours ofexisting staff to meet demand. The central forecast was for the unemployment rate to fall below4 per cent later in 2022 and to be around 3¾ per cent at the end of 2023. Membersnoted that the unemployment rate had not been sustained below 4 per cent in Australia since theearly 1970s.
Members noted that wages growth had picked up, but only to the subdued rates prevailing before thepandemic. A further pick-up in wages growth was expected in response to the tightening in the labourmarket, particularly for employees whose wages are set under individual agreements. However, the increasein overall wages growth was anticipated to be gradual in light of the inertia in institutionalwage-setting practices, including in public and private enterprise agreements. The outlook for broadermeasures of employee earnings growth had been upgraded more substantially than for base wages. Thisreflected an expected increase in bonus payments, a larger share of hours being worked at overtime rates, and a pick-up in job turnover as workers become more willing to change jobs for higher pay. Membersconcurred that there was considerable uncertainty about the response of labour costs to historically lowlevels of unemployment and the reopening of the international border.
Members noted that inflation had picked up more quickly than expected and price pressures had broadened.Headline CPI inflation had increased to 3.5 per cent over the year to the December quarter, largely reflecting higher fuel prices, higher prices for newly constructed homes and disruptions tosupply chains (including for imported durable goods). In underlying terms, inflation had picked up to2.6 per cent. Members noted that this was the first time in more than seven years thatunderlying inflation had been around the midpoint of the target range. Members observed that, nonetheless, inflation in Australia remained well below that in many other advanced economies and thebehaviour of prices and wages in Australia differed in important ways from the experience in othercountries. Goods price inflation in Australia was lower than elsewhere (particularly the United States)and Australia had been less affected by increases in wholesale gas and electricity prices. Rents, whichcomprise a large share of the consumer price index, remained relatively subdued in Australia, which wasnot the case in other countries. Wages growth in Australia was also substantially lower than in theUnited States and the United Kingdom, where participation rates had not recovered to a similar extent.
Members discussed the upward revision to the outlook for inflation. The central forecast was forunderlying inflation to increase to around 3¼ per cent in mid-2022, before declining to around2¾ per cent over 2023. Near-term inflation outcomes were forecast to be boosted by thepass-through of upstream cost pressures to consumers, particularly for building materials and retailgoods. The underlying drivers of inflation were expected to shift later in 2022, with broaderinflationary pressures emerging, including through a pick-up in labour costs. Members observed that therewere a number of sources of uncertainty surrounding the outlook for inflation, including the persistenceof price changes in response to disruptions to global and domestic supply chains, how quickly consumptionpatterns might normalise, and how prices would respond as the remaining spare capacity in the economy isabsorbed.
Members concluded their discussion of the domestic economy by considering two alternative scenarios thatwere illustrative of the ongoing uncertainty around health outcomes and household consumption. In theupside scenario, better-than-assumed health outcomes would boost households' confidence andwillingness to spend out of accumulated savings; this would also support private investment. Strongeractivity would increase the demand for labour, resulting in a decline in the unemployment rate to around3 per cent by the end of the forecast period. Inflation would be noticeably higher in thisscenario as the economy's resources would be fully employed. Alternatively, a weaker trajectory couldeventuate, owing to a combination of heightened health-related risk aversion and a major negative healthevent such as the emergence of a severe new variant of COVID-19. While bothdemand and supply would be adversely affected by the reintroduction of restrictions on activity andself-imposed restraint by individuals, labour supply could be particularly affected. In this scenario, the unemployment rate would remain above current levels throughout the forecast period. Persistentweakness in labour market conditions would be sufficient to keep inflation in the bottom half of thetarget range for most of the forecast period, although the impairment to the supply side of the economywould be expected to prevent an even larger decline in inflation.
International financial markets
Many central banks in advanced economies – including the Bank of England, Sveriges Riksbank, theBank of Canada and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) – had ceased their pandemic-related assetpurchase programs in 2021 in response to economic conditions, including stronger and more persistentinflationary pressures than had been expected. Other central banks, including the US Federal Reserve andthe European Central Bank, were expected to follow suit early in 2022. In addition, the Bank of England, Norges Bank and the RBNZ had already started to increase their policy rates in 2021. Members observedthat the flow of data over the preceding two months had contributed to financial market participantsraising their expectations for the path of policy rates over 2022 for most advanced economy centralbanks. The Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada were expected to start raising their policy rates asearly as March.
Financial markets expected the Federal Reserve to increase the federal funds rate by at least100 basis points over 2022. Members noted that the upward revision to the expected path of thefederal funds rate had been particularly important for financial market developments since December. TheFederal Reserve had indicated in December that it expected to cease its asset purchases by March 2022– previously the plan had been to stop in June 2022 – given the persistence of high inflationand further improvements in labour market conditions. However, following its meeting in January, theFederal Reserve indicated that it was likely to start running down its asset holdings sooner and fasterthan in previous episodes. It emphasised that the policy rate is regarded as the main tool forwithdrawing policy stimulus and also indicated that the first increase in the federal funds rate could beas early as March.
Government bond yields in most advanced economies had risen notably since December. Most of the increasehad occurred in real rates as market participants' expectations for withdrawal of monetary policystimulus had increased, while longer-term inflation expectations had remained little changed aroundcentral banks' targets. Members noted that, despite recent increases, longer-term bond yieldsremained at historically low levels.
Corporate financing conditions remained accommodative internationally and in Australia, despite sometightening in line with rising government bond yields and declines in equity prices. The declines inequity prices had partly reflected the effect of higher sovereign bond yields – particularly on‘high growth’ stocks – as well as rising geopolitical tensions.
In contrast to many advanced and emerging market economies, Chinese authorities had recently easedmonetary policy by lowering reserve requirement ratios as well as some key policy rates. The authoritieshad also expressed a willingness to ease monetary policy further to support the real economy. Despite thebroader loosening in financial conditions, some highly leveraged private Chinese property developerscontinued to face significant financial difficulties. Members noted that the process of resolvingdefaults would take time and that the authorities had expressed a preference to manage these problems byallowing firms with sound finances to take over the projects of distressed property developers.Spillovers to broader financial markets had remained limited and the authorities were expected to remainfocused on alleviating any potential flow-on to wider financial conditions.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, money market rates had risen slightly over preceding weeks. However, they remained close tohistorical lows, reflecting the Bank's policy measures. Market participants expected the cash rate toincrease to a little over 1 per cent by the end of 2022 and to around 2 per cent bythe end of 2023. Members noted that this was similar to market expectations for policy rates in theUnited States, despite significant differences in wages growth and inflationary pressures between the twocountries. Members also observed that market economists had brought forward their expectations for cashrate increases, with most now expecting the first increase towards the latter part of 2022.
Members noted that, following the strong labour force data and CPI releases in January, all marketeconomists surveyed by the Bank had expected the Bank to cease bond purchases in February 2022. The Bankheld 42 per cent of outstanding Australian Government Securities in the target purchase rangeand 24 per cent of outstanding securities issued by the states and territories in the targetpurchase range.
Overall, the Bank's holdings of Australian Government Securities as a share of the stock outstandingwere in the range of international experience. Members noted that after a period of weakness in thelatter part of October and early November, some measures of bond market functioning, such as bid-offerspreads, had improved. Members noted that stock lending from the Bank's bond holdings had increasedsignificantly over prior months, especially of bonds in the three-year futures basket (of which the Bankholds a sizeable share); this lending was supporting the functioning of the government bond market.Measures for the bond futures market suggested relatively low levels of liquidity at times, especiallyfor the three-year futures contract.
Government bond yields in Australia had risen alongside US treasury yields in early 2022. As a result, thedifference between bond yields in Australia and in the United States had remained broadly unchanged overthe preceding two months. The Australian dollar had traded towards the bottom of its recent range againstthe US dollar and in trade-weighted terms, and had depreciated since the beginning of 2021 despitean increase in commodity prices over the period.
Members noted that banks' funding costs remained at historic lows. Although yields on bank bonds hadincreased in late 2021, the bulk of banks' funding costs are linked to the three-month bank bill swaprate, which had remained very low. Outstanding lending rates had continued to drift downwards over recentmonths. While interest rates on new fixed-rate home loans had increased in line with swap rates in priormonths, interest rates on new variable-rate basic home loans had decreased over this period.
Credit growth had picked up strongly over 2021, driven by strong demand for finance from households andbusinesses. In monthly terms, growth in credit to owner-occupiers had increased in late 2021, aftereasing over the preceding few months, while growth in credit to investors had continued to rise. Businesscredit had increased at a fast pace, driven by lending to large firms, while lending to small firms hadbeen little changed. It was noted that these data largely predated the outbreak of the Omicron variant.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the recent Omicron outbreak of COVID-19 had affected the economy, but had not derailed the recovery. TheAustralian economy was resilient and spending was expected to pick up as case numbers trended lower. Theeconomic outlook was being supported by household and business balance sheets that remain in generallygood shape, strong business investment, a large pipeline of construction work and accommodativemacroeconomic policy settings. The pandemic continued to be the main source of uncertainty surroundingthe outlook for economic activity.
The labour market had recovered strongly, with the unemployment rate declining to its lowest level in morethan a decade in December. Members noted that forward-looking indicators of labour demand remainedstrong, and the staff's central forecast would see the unemployment rate fall to levels not seensince the early 1970s. Wages growth had picked up, but only to the low rates prevailing prior to theonset of the pandemic. A further pick-up in wages growth was expected as the labour market continues totighten. However, the pick-up was expected to be only gradual and there was uncertainty about thebehaviour of wages as the international border re-opens and the unemployment rate declines tohistorically low levels.
Members observed that inflation had picked up more quickly than the Bank had expected, but was still lowerthan in many other countries. In year-ended terms, underlying inflation was expected to increase furtherover coming quarters. Members noted that some moderation in inflation was expected as supply problemswere resolved. Over time, stronger growth in labour costs was expected to become the more importantdriver of inflation. The central forecast was for underlying inflation to be within the target band overboth 2022 and 2023.
Members noted that financial conditions in Australia remained highly accommodative, and that theBank's bond purchase program, the funding provided under the Term Funding Facility and the low levelof interest rates were providing important support to the Australian economy as it recovers from theeffects of the pandemic. Australian Government bond yields had risen in early 2022 alongside US treasuryyields. The Australian dollar exchange rate was around its lows of the preceding year. The Australianbond market was continuing to function reasonably well, supported by the Bank's stock lendingactivities, although there had been some pressure points recently. This was evident around the three-yearmark, where a gap had emerged between the price of physical bonds and the futures contract.
Housing prices had risen strongly over the preceding year, although the rate of increase had eased in somecities. Housing credit growth had been strong over 2021. Members continued to emphasise the importance ofmaintaining lending standards and borrowers having adequate buffers.
The Board had previously announced that it would make a decision about the bond purchase program at thismeeting. Three possible options were discussed. The first option was to reduce the pace of purchases frommid-February with an expectation of a likely end point in May 2022. The second option was to reduce thepace of purchases and review it again in May 2022. The third option was to cease purchases altogether inmid-February. These options reflected the expectation that the economy would continue to bounce back. Indiscussing the options, members noted that the stimulus associated with the stock of bonds alreadypurchased in the program would continue to provide significant support to the economy for some time.
Members reviewed the previously agreed criteria that guided the bond purchase program – namely, theactions of other central banks, the functioning of the Australian bond market, and actual and expectedprogress towards the Board's goals for employment and inflation. Most other central banks had alreadycompleted their bond-buying programs, or would do so soon. Members noted the staff's assessment thatalthough the Australian bond market could accommodate further bond purchases by the Bank, there would bea rising probability of additional strains emerging.
Most importantly, since November 2021 better-than-expected progress towards the Board's goals had beenmade. Members observed that the achievement of the goals was within sight for the first time in severalyears. The unemployment rate was at its lowest level since 2008 and underlying inflation was in themiddle of the target range for the first time since 2014. In these circumstances, members agreed that itwas the right time to draw the bond purchase program to a close.
Members then discussed the reinvestment of the proceeds of maturing bonds. They noted that, in Australia, there are large gaps in the maturity profile of government bonds, which is not the case in many othercountries. The next maturity of an Australian Government bond is not until July 2022, which provides theBoard with additional time to make a decision. Members agreed that a decision about reinvestment would bemade in May 2022, with the key considerations being the state of the economy and the outlook forinflation and unemployment.
Turning to the decision for the cash rate, members remained committed to maintaining highly supportivemonetary conditions to achieve the objectives of a return to full employment and inflation consistentwith the target. As previously agreed, the Board will not increase the cash rate until actual inflationis sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target band. While inflation had picked up, members agreed it was too early to conclude that it was sustainably within the target band. There wereuncertainties about how persistent the pick-up in inflation would be as supply-side problems wereresolved. Wages growth also remained modest and it was likely to be some time before aggregate wagesgrowth would be at a rate consistent with inflation being sustainably at target. The Board is prepared tobe patient as it monitors how the various factors affecting inflation in Australia evolve.
The decision
The Board decided upon the following policy settings:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlementbalances at zero per centcease further purchases of government securities under the bond purchase program, with the finalpurchases to take place on 10 February 2022.