Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 1 June 2021
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Luke Yeaman (Deputy Secretary, Macroeconomic Group, Treasury) attended in place of Steven Kennedy PSM(Secretary to the Australian Treasury) in terms of section 22 of the Reserve Bank Act1959.
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic AnalysisDepartment), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Head, DomesticMarkets Department), Clare Noone (Senior Manager, International Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the globaloutlook had improved over recent months and risks to the global economy had become more balanced. Globaltrade volumes had increased strongly and measures of new export orders were buoyant. COVID-19 case numbers had fallen in many advanced economies as vaccination rateshad risen, and containment measures were being eased. Surveys of business conditions were strong, withmanufacturing activity at high levels and conditions in the services sector continuing to improve.Fiscal and monetary policy measures had continued to support the recovery. In China, the economy wascontinuing to benefit from strong global demand for manufactured goods. The underlying drivers of therecovery there were also becoming more broadly based with the recovery in the consumption of householdservices.
Despite these positive developments, the global recovery had been uneven and this would continue to bea feature of the outlook for some time. Many emerging market countries, including India, continued toexperience significant health and economic challenges. Vaccine supplies remained limited in manyemerging market countries, hampering their economic recoveries. Containment measures had been reimposedin some countries in Asia following recent virus outbreaks and were likely to slow the recoverytemporarily in these countries.
A key feature of the global economy during the pandemic had been the emergence of supply chainbottlenecks, which had contributed to lengthening delays in the delivery of some manufactured goods.Members noted that these bottlenecks had been caused by disruptions to current and earlier productionand ongoing strong demand for goods. Many firms were attempting to rebuild inventories after they haddeclined to low levels. Shortages of global semiconductor chips and constraints on shipping capacitywere reported as acute. This, in turn, had hampered downstream production for a variety of goods.
Global supply chain bottlenecks were generally expected to be transitory, although there wasconsiderable uncertainty about how long they could take to ease. Considerations included the speed withwhich global demand rebalanced from goods back to services and how quickly containment measures werelifted in response to increased vaccination coverage and successful control of the virus. In parts ofeast Asia, businesses were responding to supply pressures by investing in new capacity. Large producersof semiconductor chips had boosted investment and projected substantial further increases in productionover the following couple of years. Large shipbuilders were also planning to increase capacity followingseveral years where investment in shipping had been weak, but this would take time.
In discussing recent developments in global inflation, members noted that global supply chainbottlenecks and higher commodity prices had contributed to an increase in producer price inflation in anumber of countries. However, increases in wages and other production costs, which are key components ofthe overall cost base for many firms, had generally been more subdued. Wages growth in the United Stateshad been noticeably stronger than elsewhere.
Year-ended consumer price inflation had increased in advanced economies because of the upstream pricepressures and an increase in consumer demand as containment measures were relaxed. However, measures ofunderlying inflation that exclude volatile items had been lower. Goods account for less than half of theconsumer price index basket in many advanced economies, muting the effect of upstream price pressures onoverall inflation. In Australia, the exchange rate had appreciated alongside higher commodity prices atthe end of 2020, further limiting the extent to which higher global goods prices were passed on toconsumers.
Members noted that, in the short term, year-ended headline inflation was expected to rise temporarilyaround the middle of the year, owing to base effects and temporary price pressures as global supplychain bottlenecks and higher commodity prices drove consumer prices up. However, in most advancedeconomies, including Australia, spare capacity in labour markets was likely to contain underlyinginflationary pressures for some time. Measures of inflation expectations in advanced economies werearound or below central banks' targets.
The Australian economy was continuing to benefit from higher commodity prices and strong demand forresource exports, despite ongoing difficulties in the trading relationship with China. Members notedthat the terms of trade were likely to be near record levels in the June quarter and remain high in thenear term. The price of iron ore briefly reached a record high early in May, before easing back to belowthe levels observed at the time of the previous meeting.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic developments, members noted that the Australian economy was transitioningfrom recovery to expansion with more momentum than previously anticipated. This was the result offavourable health outcomes and substantial fiscal and monetary policy support. While uncertainty aroundthe outlook had declined, further surprises in either direction were plausible given scenarios for thepath of household consumption and saving, as well as the extent of stimulus from the substantial fiscaland monetary policy easing. Health outcomes also continued to be an important source of uncertainty, although this was likely to diminish as a greater proportion of the population is vaccinated.
Members noted that growth in household consumption had moderated in the March quarter following thestrong rebound in the second half of 2020. The decline in consumption since the onset of the pandemichad been driven by the reduction in spending on discretionary services. However, it was expected that, as containment measures continue to be eased and more consumption possibilities become available, therecovery in spending on services would continue. While the most recent lockdown in Victoria wouldconstrain spending on services in the June quarter, over the following couple of years householdconsumption was expected to be strong, especially in per capita terms, supported by higher employment, rising net wealth and lower levels of uncertainty.
Conditions in the residential construction sector remained buoyant. Residential construction activityhad increased strongly in the March quarter, led by the construction of detached houses and alterations& additions. Despite historically low population growth, residential construction activity wasexpected to strengthen further over coming quarters, supported by government incentives, low interestrates and the very high level of building approvals over prior months. Building approvals and land saleswere expected to ease back as the HomeBuilder subsidy had closed to new applications. However, theextension of the final commencement date for construction under this program implied that the effects ofhigher construction activity would be spread over the following 18 months or so.
Prices in the established housing market increased further in May. New residential listings had beenabove the levels recorded in previous years, but the total number of outstanding listings remained low, indicating that properties continued to be sold quickly. Auction volumes and housing turnover had alsopicked up strongly over recent months, and auction clearance rates remained above average. Rental marketconditions had continued to tighten outside of Melbourne and Sydney, with advertised rents increasingrapidly in regional areas and some capital cities. In Sydney, advertised rents had been increasing againafter declining earlier in the pandemic. In contrast, rental market conditions remained weak inMelbourne, where advertised rents remained well below their pre-pandemic levels and the vacancy rate wasstill high.
Members welcomed the increase in business investment expenditure in the March quarter, led by machineryand equipment investment, and forward-looking indicators of business investment were more favourablethan they had been for some time. Accommodative financing conditions and tax incentives were supportingthe recovery in investment. Survey measures of business confidence, capacity utilisation and forwardorders had all increased to very high levels in April. Non-residential building approvals and surveyedcapital expenditure intentions also pointed to further growth in investment. However, even this recoveryimplied that non-mining investment would remain a relatively low share of overall output. Membersobserved that mining firms' investment intentions had been largely unresponsive to the increase incommodity prices over the preceding year.
Members noted that labour market data had been mixed in April. The rate of unemployment andunderemployment had declined further in April, and while total employment had also declined in themonth, full-time employment had increased. Unusually strong seasonal effects related to the timing ofEaster and school holidays appeared to have reduced both employment and unemployment in April, as morepeople took leave or exited the labour force in the month. More broadly, leading indicators of labourdemand, such as job vacancies, continued to point to further solid increases in employment in the periodahead.
In discussing spare capacity in the labour market, members noted that while the participation rate hadincreased to historically high levels, further increases were possible. The number of people who wererecorded as outside the labour force but open to work in the near future was still quite high. Combinedwith other measures of potential labour supply currently classified as outside the labour force, thissuggested there was still a pool of workers available to firms should the demand for labour continue toincrease. Information from the Bank's liaison program and other surveys indicated that labourshortages were appearing in some parts of the economy. The reduction in access to foreign labour andreduced interstate mobility were cited by some firms as contributing factors. However, firms facinglabour shortages were citing a preference for non-wage measures to attract and retain staff, such asone-off bonuses and more flexible working arrangements. Some firms were also opting to ration outputbecause of labour shortages, rather than pay higher wages to attract new workers.
Recent data for the March quarter did not point to a meaningful pick-up in wages growth overall. Wagesgrowth had remained around historically low levels, and many firms still had wage freezes in place.Wages growth was low across a broad range of industries. While a faster pick-up in wages growth waspossible, members continued to expect a gradual increase in the following few years as spare capacity inthe labour market was steadily absorbed.
In concluding their analysis of recent developments in the domestic economy, members discussed thefurther fiscal support announced in the Australian Government Budget. Receipts for the 2020/21 financial year were much stronger and outlays were lower thanforeshadowed in December's mid-year fiscal update; the Victorian Government Budget in May reflecteda similar pattern of revisions to receipts and outlays. Higher-than-expected iron ore prices, and thestrong recovery in the labour market and household consumption, had all contributed to the strength inrevenues. The underlying cash deficit for the Australian Government was therefore expected to be smallerin the current financial year than previously assumed. However, new spending commitments and anextension of tax relief measures were also announced for the coming years. These were expected to offeradditional support for the recovery relative to the assumptions at the time of the mid-year fiscalupdate.
International financial markets
Financial market conditions had been broadly stable during May. Longer-term sovereign bond yieldsremained around levels seen since mid March and conditions in corporate bond markets remained highlyaccommodative. Equity prices in most major markets, including in Australia, were around recordhighs.
Members observed that central banks in advanced economies had reiterated their commitments to providesignificant monetary policy support until there is evidence of sustained progress towards their goalsfor employment and inflation. In line with this guidance, market-implied policy rate expectations hadbeen little changed in recent weeks. An exception was in New Zealand, where market expectations for thepolicy rate had moved higher after the central bank released projections showing a faster increase inthe policy rate from mid 2022 than markets had expected. A few central banks had slowed theirgovernment bond purchases in prior months and the US Federal Open Market Committee had indicated in itsmeeting minutes that discussions to plan such an adjustment could begin at upcoming meetings. Thesecommunications were broadly consistent with market expectations.
The US dollar had depreciated since bond markets had stabilised in March and, on a trade-weightedbasis, had returned to its level at the start of the year. The Australian dollar continued to trade in anarrow range despite significant movements in some commodity prices over the prior month.
Domestic financial markets
In domestic financial markets, the Bank's policy measures continued to underpin very lowinterest rates and the provision of credit. The yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond hadedged lower over the preceding month to be a little below 10 basis points. The November 2024Australian Government bond will become the bond with a residual maturity closest to 3 years inearly August. Members observed that the yield on this bond implied that market participants did not, onbalance, expect the yield target to be extended to that bond in August. Market expectations for thecash rate had been little changed, with market pricing still implying an expectation that the cash ratewill begin to be increased from its current level late in 2022 or early in 2023.
The yield on 10-year Australian Government Securities (AGS) had declined slightly over May, butremained around levels of recent months. The spread between yields on 10-year AGS and US Treasuries wasstill close to zero.
The Bank's bond purchase program had run smoothly, with the second $100 billion of bondpurchases scheduled to be completed in September 2021. Members noted that the Bank was projected to ownaround 30 per cent of AGS outstanding and around 15 per cent of bonds issued byAustralian states and territories outstanding by that time. This was at the lower end of other centralbanks' ownership share of outstanding government bonds. Members observed that market economistsexpected an extension of the program, with expectations ranging from a further $50 to$100 billion of purchases over the course of the 6 months or so after September.
Bank funding costs and lending rates overall were at historic lows. Draw-downs on the Bank'sTerm Funding Facility had picked up as the 30 June deadline for accessing the 3-year fundingprogram approached. At the time of the meeting, banks had drawn down $134 billion and asignificant proportion of the remaining $75 billion still available to banks was expected to bedrawn down over subsequent weeks. Members noted that the facility is providing low-cost fixed-ratefunding for 3 years, which means that it will continue to support low borrowing costs untilmid 2024.
Members observed that the Bank's package of monetary policy measures had led to sizeabledeclines in mortgage rates, particularly for fixed-rate loans. As a result, the share of fixed-ratemortgages had risen to account for around 30 per cent of the stock of housing credit. Housingcredit growth had continued to pick up, with ongoing strong demand from owner-occupiers, especiallyfirst-home buyers. Growth in credit extended to investors in housing had also strengthened from lowlevels. Business lending rates had also declined substantially over the preceding year, althoughlending to businesses had been little changed. Information from liaison with banks suggested that, while businesses' appetite to borrow had increased somewhat, many businesses had little immediateneed to borrow and demand for credit remained uneven.
Members discussed the implications of climate change for monetary policy and the Bank'sfinancial stability mandate through its effects on the economy and the financial system. Members notedthat, both in Australia and abroad, the private sector had begun responding to climate risks in anumber of ways, including by increasing disclosure of climate-related risks and developing‘green finance’ products. Central banks and financial regulators had been activelyaccounting for climate-related risks in carrying out their policy and regulatory responsibilities.Domestically, the Bank is working closely with other Council of Financial Regulators (CFR) agencies onthese issues, with a focus on building the foundations for financial institutions and corporations tounderstand climate risks and for the effective pricing of these risks by markets. The AustralianPrudential Regulation Authority's Climate Vulnerability Assessment is a key CFR initiative that isexpected to assist Australian financial institutions with the management of climate risk, and improvethe consistency and effectiveness of climate-related disclosures.
Members observed that developments globally relating to the management and regulation ofclimate-related risk had become increasingly prominent in the asset allocation decisions ofinternational investors. This development could affect the cost and availability of finance forcorporations and governments. As a related matter, members observed that taxonomies were beingestablished in a number of economies to provide corporations and investors with a framework tounderstand whether an activity or financial product is ‘sustainable’. Members noted thatparticular taxonomies could become very influential in global financial markets, and these will have animportant bearing on the cost and availability of financing the transition to lower carbon emissionsfor Australia.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economic recovery from thepandemic had continued and the outlook was for strong growth in output in 2021 and the following year.Policy settings and the pace of COVID-19 vaccinations had supported globaleconomic activity, but the recovery remained uneven and the virus had not yet been contained in somecountries. Global goods trade had continued to increase strongly and commodity prices remained at higherlevels than at the beginning of 2021. Despite the more positive real economic conditions, wages growthand inflation in underlying terms remained low.
Sovereign bond yields had been steady in recent months, after rising earlier in the year in response tothe positive news on vaccines and the additional sizeable fiscal stimulus in the United States.Medium-term inflation expectations had increased from around record lows to be closer to centralbanks' inflation targets. Central banks in major advanced economies had continued to signal thathigher inflation would be temporary and restated guidance that they would continue to providesignificant monetary policy support until there was evidence of substantial progress towards their goalsfor employment and inflation.
The economic recovery in Australia was stronger than had been expected, supported by fiscal measuresand very accommodative financial conditions. The unemployment rate had fallen more quickly than expectedand there had been reports of labour shortages in some parts of the economy. Leading indicators ofemployment growth, including job vacancies, pointed to ongoing strong employment growth, and theunemployment rate was expected to decline to around 5 per cent by the end of 2021.
Inflation and wage pressures remained subdued, despite the strong recovery in the economy andemployment. A pick-up in inflation and wages growth was expected, but this was likely to be only gradualand modest. In the central forecast scenario, inflation in underlying terms was expected to be1½ per cent in 2021 and 2 per cent in mid 2023. The reversal of some COVID-19-related price reductions would see inflation temporarily rise above3 per cent in the June quarter before falling back below the target. Members noted that thestrong focus on cost containment by businesses meant that it would take some time for spare capacity tobe reduced and the labour market to be tight enough to generate wage increases consistent with achievingthe inflation target. Moreover, it was likely that overall wages growth would need to be sustainablyabove 3 per cent to achieve the target, and this is well above the current level.
Members observed that housing markets had strengthened further, with prices continuing to increase inall major markets. Housing credit growth had increased, with ongoing strong demand from owner-occupiers, especially first-home buyers. Growth in borrowing by investors had also started to increase in recentmonths, from low levels. Given the environment of strong demand for housing, rising housing prices andlow interest rates, members continued to emphasise the importance of maintaining lending standards andcarefully monitoring trends in borrowing.
Members agreed that the current package of monetary policy measures continued to support the economy byencouraging an ample supply of credit to the economy and keeping financing costs very low. The 3-yearAustralian Government bond yield had edged lower but remained consistent with the Board's target ofaround 10 basis points. Banks' overall funding costs were at historically low levels.Borrowing rates for households and businesses on outstanding loans had continued to drift lower and werealso at historical lows. Members noted that, in addition to lowering domestic funding costs, theBank's policy package had contributed to a lower exchange rate than would otherwise have been thecase. Together, monetary and fiscal policy had supported the recovery in aggregate demand and thepick-up in employment.
Members discussed the key considerations for the decisions to be made at the July 2021 meeting on the3-year yield target and the government bond purchase program. In discussing these considerations, members noted a return to full employment as a priority for monetary policy that would assist withachieving the inflation target. Consequently, monetary policy would be likely to need to remain highlyaccommodative for some time yet.
Regarding the 3-year yield target, the Board will consider whether to retain the April 2024 bond as thetarget bond or extend the target to the next maturity, the November 2024 bond. Members had previouslyagreed that the target of around 10 basis points would be retained. In addition, the Board hadpreviously stated that it would not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably withinthe 2 to 3 per cent target range. A key consideration for the decision regarding theyield target would be an assessment of the prospect of this condition being met some time in 2024.Members also discussed the likely effect of the decision in relation to the yield target on overallfinancial conditions.
In relation to the government bond purchase program, the Board would decide upon future government bondpurchases at the July meeting ahead of the completion of the second $100 billion of purchases inearly September 2021. The options discussed included ceasing purchasing bonds in September (other thanto support the yield target if necessary); repeating $100 billion of purchases for another6 months; scaling back the amount purchased or spreading the purchases over a longer period; andmoving to an approach where the pace of the bond purchases is reviewed more frequently, based on theflow of data and the economic outlook.
Key considerations for the decision in July would be the progress made towards the Board's goalsfor employment and inflation, and the likely effect of different options on overall financialconditions. Observing that the bond purchase program had been one of the factors underpinning theaccommodative conditions necessary for the economic recovery, members thought it would be premature toconsider ceasing the program.
The Board remained committed to doing what it reasonably could to support the Australian economy, andwould maintain highly supportive monetary conditions until its goals for employment and inflation wereachieved. Members affirmed that the cash rate target would remain at 10 basis points, and the rateof remuneration on Exchange Settlement balances at zero, for as long as necessary. The Board would notincrease the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per centtarget range. For this to occur, wages growth would need to be materially higher than it is currently.This would require significant gains in employment and a sustained return to a tight labour market. TheBoard viewed these conditions as unlikely until 2024 at the earliest.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.1 per centan interest rate of zero on Exchange Settlement balances held by financial institutions at theBanka target of around 0.1 per cent for the yield on the 3-year Australian Government bondthe purchase of an additional $100 billion of government bonds at the same rate of $5 billionper week following completion of the first bond purchase program of $100 billionthe expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small and medium-sizedbusinesses, with an interest rate on new drawings until 30 June 2021 of0.1 per cent.