Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 1 March 2022
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Tom Rosewall (Deputy Head, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary)
Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic AnalysisDepartment), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by focusing on Russia's invasion ofUkraine, observing that it was devastating for the people of Ukraine. The invasion had also createdadditional uncertainty about the global outlook and was an adverse supply shock that would result inlower growth and higher inflation. Members acknowledged that the economic implications of the wardepended on the scale and duration of the conflict and the nature of any second-round effects.
Members recognised that the war in Ukraine would pose a significant setback for the recovery in Europe, particularly through the effects of disruptions to energy supply and higher energy prices. It was notedthat European gas imports are mostly sourced from Russia, and natural gas prices in Europe had surged.While some gas exports could be redirected from the United States and the Middle East to Europe, thiswould take time; moreover, capacity constraints and the long-term nature of many gas contracts meantthere were limits to the extent to which energy sources could be diverted to Europe.
More broadly, members noted that the surge in prices for energy and other commodities, including foodcommodities, was a substantial relative price shock, with effects that would fall unevenly acrosseconomies. It would redistribute income from energy-importing countries to energy-exporting countries.The energy intensity of many economies had fallen substantially over recent decades, and this wouldcushion the effects of the energy price shock compared with the 1970s. Even so, the net effect would belower global output than otherwise. At the same time, further disruptions to global supply chains wouldlead to higher global inflation in the period ahead.
Members noted that, prior to the invasion of Ukraine, developments in international supply chains had beenmixed; supply chains for some goods remained strained or had deteriorated further amid ongoing strongdemand, while conditions had eased in other areas. Alongside broad-based price increases inenergy-related commodities in recent months, prices for base metals had increased further. Inventories ofbase metals had been run down because smelters had cut capacity in response to high energy costs.Domestic distribution and production networks had also been significantly disrupted by record-highnumbers of workers having needed to isolate because of illness. However, there were other indicatorssuggesting that supply-chain disruptions had begun to ease: supplier delivery times had edged lower, semiconductor prices were noticeably below previous peaks and motor vehicle production was showing signsof recovering. Members acknowledged that it would take time for supply issues in the global economy to beresolved. The war in Ukraine was adding to these challenges.
Members noted that, before the invasion of Ukraine, the global economy had continued to recover from theCOVID-19 pandemic. Accommodative policy settings and strong private sectorbalance sheets in advanced economies were supporting the global recovery. Growth in Australia's majortrading partners had increased to an above-trend pace in the final quarter of 2021, resulting in outputbeing a little above its pre-pandemic level. The effects of the Omicron variant on the global economywere expected to be short-lived; the rate of new infections had already declined across much of the worldand mobility had started to rebound. Consumption of services was picking up in advanced economies withmore opportunities for discretionary spending.
Members noted that growth in China had picked up in the December quarter, following an earlierregulation-induced slowing in growth. Manufacturing output had strengthened, infrastructure constructionhad stabilised and consumption growth had remained resilient despite targeted lockdowns to control localCOVID-19 outbreaks. Demand for iron ore had been boosted by recent policyeasing measures by Chinese authorities, which were expected to support steel-intensive growth, includingfrom infrastructure construction; partly in response, iron ore prices had increased substantially sinceNovember. Another indicator of the more supportive policy environment since late 2021 had been the sharpincrease in issuance of local government special bonds.
Labour market conditions had tightened further in advanced economies. Labour demand was strong andunemployment rates were near or below pre-pandemic levels. Despite this, wages growth remained containedin most economies, with the United Kingdom and the United States two key exceptions. Stronger wagesgrowth in these economies reflected reduced labour supply in the context of strong labour demand, increased job mobility and flexible wage-setting mechanisms.
Members noted that many economies had been experiencing high inflation before the surge in energy pricesarising from the invasion of Ukraine. This complicated the task for policymakers in severaljurisdictions. In the United States, inflation had reached a 40-year high, and a number of other advancedeconomies had recently recorded their highest rates of headline and core inflation in some years. In mostadvanced economies, this mainly reflected unusually strong goods price inflation (most notably in theUnited States), although services price inflation had also picked up and was now running above ratesprevailing before the pandemic. Price rises for housing services had continued to increase. Inflation hadalso picked up further in some higher-income Asian economies in recent months; however, inflationremained low in Japan and some emerging Asian economies, where output was generally still some way belowpre-pandemic paths.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic conditions, members observed that the Australian economy had been resilientin the face of the Omicron outbreak. This had followed a period of particularly strong momentum inactivity and the labour market at the end of 2021. COVID-19 case numbers andhospitalisations had both fallen steadily after reaching a peak in mid-January, health-relatedrestrictions had eased and indicators of mobility had recovered sharply. In line with the internationalexperience, the main adverse effect of the Omicron outbreak on the domestic economy had been on laboursupply. But these disruptions had been short-lived, with timely data on spending and information from theBank's business liaison program having suggested that activity and hours worked had begun to recoverfrom late January.
Members noted that firms' investment intentions, as reflected in the Capital Expenditure Survey, implied moderate growth in business investment over the following year or so. Similarly, firms in theBank's business liaison program had indicated that their investment intentions remained at or aboveaverage levels. Business surveys had indicated that around half of firms were experiencing supply-chaindisruptions, although the majority of the disruptions were having only a small effect on businessoperations, and business confidence had picked up in January.
Members noted that conditions in the housing market had been solid overall, if a little more uneven.Approvals for new detached housing and alterations and additions had remained strong over recent months.A large pipeline of work would continue to support housing construction over the following quarters, although supply-chain issues and labour availability were constraining how quickly this pipeline wasreduced.
National housing price growth had moderated over recent months, with conditions varying across thecountry. In the established housing market, new listings in Sydney and Melbourne had picked up and priceshad levelled off in recent months. However, in some smaller cities and regional areas, total listings hadstill been low and price growth had remained strong. Advertised rents continued to increase steadilyacross many areas of the country, supported by low vacancy rates.
Members noted that labour market conditions were the tightest since 2008 and the outlook remainedpositive. While the Labour Force Survey had indicated that total hours worked fell by9 per cent in January, this reflected a higher-than-usual number of employees who were on leaveor otherwise unable to work because of illness or the need to isolate. A strong bounce-back in hoursworked was expected in the following months alongside further increases in employment, which had beenresilient in January. The unemployment rate was unchanged in January at around the lowest level in14 years. Forward-looking indicators of labour demand, such as job advertisements and employmentintentions, including from the Bank's business liaison program, had suggested that a furthertightening in labour market conditions was likely in the period ahead. Many firms were continuing toreport that the availability of labour had been constraining their ability to expand output. Job mobilityhad increased, but not to the extent seen in some other economies.
Wages growth had picked up, but only to around its pre-pandemic rate. The Wage Price Index increased by0.7 per cent in the December quarter to be 2.3 per cent higher in year-ended terms.Private sector wages had increased by 2.4 per cent in year-ended terms, with most industriesexperiencing wages growth around this rate; including bonuses and commissions, private sector wagesgrowth had increased further to be 3 per cent higher in year-ended terms. Members agreed thiswas consistent with a tightening in labour market conditions and firms using alternative measures toraising base wages in an effort to attract and retain staff. Public sector wages growth had picked up to2.1 per cent in year-ended terms, led by scheduled increases in enterprise agreements forseveral large state employers in New South Wales and Queensland, following a period when wage freezes hadapplied.
Across industries and states, wages growth outcomes had been unusually tightly clustered in thelow-to-mid 2 per cent range. While the share of jobs recording wage increases of 2–3 per cent had recently returned to around pre-pandemiclevels, the share of jobs with wage increases above 3 per cent had been little changed inrecent quarters. The share of jobs that experienced a wage change was higher than usual for the Decemberquarter in both the public and private sectors, but this largely reflected catch-up followingpandemic-related delays to regular pay increases. Information from the Bank's business liaisonprogram had suggested that the distribution of firms' wages growth expectations over the coming yearremained similar to the pre-pandemic pattern. Surveys of unions' expectations had also beenconsistent with wages growth of around 2½–3 per cent over the year ahead. Members agreed thatthe risks to the outlook for wages growth were skewed to the upside, reflecting the low rate of labourunderutilisation; at the same time, there was a high degree of uncertainty about the behaviour of nominaland real wages at historically low levels of unemployment.
Members concluded their discussion of domestic economic conditions by noting that non-labour input costpressures remained widespread across industries, but were most acute for goods-importing industries.Information from the Bank's business liaison program had suggested that firms were increasinglyprepared to pass these higher costs onto their customers, particularly in the construction, manufacturingand retail industries, where upstream cost pressures had been most acute. High international shippingrates had remained a source of cost pressure for firms across many industries. Members agreed that a keyissue for the inflation outlook was whether recent price adjustments represented a one-off shift in thelevel of prices or the beginning of a period of ongoing price increases.
International financial markets
Russia's invasion of Ukraine had adversely affected sentiment in financial markets. Members notedthere had been an increase in market volatility. Major equity markets had declined despite generallypositive earnings announcements from listed companies. By contrast, the Australian equity market hadincreased in February, driven by the financial, energy and materials sectors.
In Russia, the market reaction had been pronounced, largely in response to the step-up in globalsanctions. Sanctions on the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) had significantly curtailed its ability to useits foreign exchange reserves to support the rouble. The CBR had increased interest rates from9.5 per cent to 20 per cent after the rouble had depreciated by30 per cent. Meanwhile, equity prices in Russia had declined significantly and government bondyields had increased sharply.
Over the preceding month, expectations for how quickly central banks in advanced economies would withdrawmonetary stimulus had increased because inflation in many advanced economies had continued to be higherthan expected. The increase in prices for oil and European natural gas following the invasion of Ukrainehad added to near-term inflationary pressures. However, the pace of expected policy rate increases hadbeen pared back modestly.
The US Federal Reserve had indicated that it expected to commence raising its policy rate in March. Marketpricing had suggested that the federal funds rate may be increased by as much as 125 basis pointsduring 2022. Similar increases in policy rates were expected to occur this year in Canada, New Zealandand the United Kingdom. In light of the change to the inflation outlook, market participants had expectedthe European Central Bank to cease its asset purchases this year and to begin increasing its policy rate.By contrast, the Bank of Japan had reaffirmed that it would maintain its highly accommodative policysettings – including the target for 10-year government bond yields – because it was stillsome way from achieving its inflation target.
Government bond yields had risen further in most markets over the preceding month, reflecting higherexpected policy rates and inflation expectations, especially for shorter maturities. Globally, yields oncorporate debt had increased by a little more than those on government bonds over the period. Membersnoted that increasing risk aversion following the invasion of Ukraine had resulted in a decline insovereign yields over the week preceding the meeting.
The major currencies had been little changed in prior months, following an appreciation of theUS dollar during the second half of 2021. The Australian dollar had appreciated a little over thepreceding month, but had remained around the lower end of its range over the previous year on atrade-weighted basis.
Domestic financial markets
Members observed that the Board's decision to cease purchases under the bond purchase program inFebruary had been widely anticipated and there had been little reaction to the announcement. Yields on10-year Australian Government Securities had increased along with those on global sovereign bonds duringthe preceding two months and were at their highest level in three years. Meanwhile, measures of marketfunctioning had improved. Demand to borrow Australian Government bonds from the Bank, which wassupporting market functioning, had increased further.
Shorter-term inflation expectations implied by market prices had increased, while implied longer-terminflation expectations had been little changed. Expectations for policy tightening had increased. Moneymarket pricing had implied that the cash rate would begin to be increased from around the middle of theyear, to reach about 1 per cent by the end of 2022 and around 2 per cent by the endof 2023.
While some elements of banks' funding costs had risen, overall they had remained close to historiclows. In particular, bank bond yields and some new term deposit rates had risen, although a highproportion of banks' funding costs were linked to three-month bank bill swap rates, which remainedvery low. Even though interest rates on new fixed-rate loans had increased sharply over prior months, inline with swap rates, the average rate paid on outstanding housing loans had declined a little further.Growth in credit to owner-occupiers remained strong, while growth in credit to investors had picked upfurther in prior months. Business credit growth had eased a little in January but remained at highlevels, reflecting continued strong growth in lending to large businesses.
Members noted that the Bank planned some operational changes to its regular open market liquidityoperations as conditions evolved in a financial environment of substantial system liquidity. These wouldbe operational changes, and would not have any implications for the future path for monetary policy.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members noted that the global economy was continuing to recover fromthe pandemic. However, the war in Ukraine was a major new source of uncertainty. Inflation in parts ofthe world had increased sharply as a result of large increases in energy prices and disruptions to supplychains at a time of strong demand. In this environment of higher inflation, the prices of manycommodities had increased further.
The Australian economy remained resilient and spending was expected to pick up further after the Omicronoutbreak. The economic outlook was being supported by household and business balance sheets that weregenerally in good shape, a large pipeline of construction work to be completed and an expected recoveryin business investment. Members agreed that macroeconomic policy settings remained supportive of growth.
Members acknowledged the ongoing resilience of the labour market. The rates of both unemployment andunderemployment were at their lowest levels since 2008. Forward-looking indicators of labour demandremained strong, and the staff's central forecast would see the unemployment rate fall to levels notseen since the early-to-mid-1970s. Members observed that wages growth had picked up, but at the aggregatelevel was only around the relatively low levels prevailing prior to the onset of the pandemic. Wagesgrowth and broader measures of labour costs were expected to increase as the labour market continued totighten. The pick-up was expected to be only gradual, although members noted the uncertainty about thebehaviour of wages as the unemployment rate declined to historically low levels.
Inflation in Australia had picked up, but was still lower than in many other countries. In year-endedterms, underlying inflation was expected to increase further over coming quarters before moderating assupply problems are resolved. However, the war in Ukraine and the associated increase in energy priceshad created additional uncertainty about the inflation outlook. Members noted headline inflation wouldincrease by more than underlying inflation in the near term because of the effect of global developmentson petrol prices.
Members agreed that financial conditions in Australia remained highly accommodative. Interest ratesremained at very low levels, although some fixed rates on new housing and business lending had risenrecently. The Australian dollar exchange rate was around its lows of the preceding year or so. Housingprices had risen strongly, although the rate of increase had declined and, in some cities, prices hadbeen steady or declined a little. Members observed that high rates of household saving meant manyhouseholds had built substantial buffers. Members continued to emphasise the importance of maintaininglending standards and borrowers having adequate buffers.
Turning to the decision for the cash rate, members remained committed to maintaining highly supportivemonetary conditions to achieve the objectives of a return to full employment in Australia and inflationconsistent with the target. As agreed at previous meetings, the Board will not increase the cash rateuntil actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target band. Whileinflation had picked up, members agreed it was too early to conclude that it was sustainably within thetarget band. There were uncertainties about how persistent the pick-up in inflation would be given recentdevelopments in global energy markets and ongoing supply-side problems. Wages growth also remained modestand it was likely to be some time before aggregate wages growth would be at a rate consistent withinflation being sustainably at target. The Board is prepared to be patient as it monitors how the variousfactors affecting inflation in Australia evolve.
The decision
The Board decided to maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate onExchange Settlement balances at zero per cent.