Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Melbourne – 1 October 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, IanHarper, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Matthew Flavel (Acting Secretary to the Australian Treasury) attended in place of Steven Kennedy PSM(Secretary to the Australian Treasury) in terms of section 22 of the Reserve Bank Act1959.
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Jonathan Kearns (Head ofFinancialStability Department)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of global economic conditions by noting that heightened policyuncertainty was affecting international trade and business investment. This had continued to beapparentin a range of indicators, including new export orders and investment intentions. Conditions inthemanufacturing sector had remained subdued, partly because of ongoing US–China tradetensions.These tensions had led to a contraction in bilateral trade between the United States and China, whichwas resulting in the diversion of some activity to other economies. Members noted that the tradeandtechnology disputes continued to pose significant downside risks to the global economic outlook.
In general, conditions in the services sector had been relatively resilient in most advancedeconomies, supported by strong labour market conditions. Employment growth had continued to outpace growthinworking-age populations, unemployment rates had remained at low levels and wages growth hadrisen.Nevertheless, inflation had remained low, although core inflation had picked up in the UnitedStates inrecent months.
In the United States, GDP growth appeared to have slowed a little further in the Septemberquarter.Growth in core capital goods orders and investment intentions had declined, whereas growth inconsumption had remained robust. In the euro area, the weakness in output growth in the Junequarter hadbeen broadly based. Industrial production had fallen, particularly in Germany, and investmentintentionshad remained below average. In Japan, exports had declined further, although output growth intheSeptember quarter had been supported by above-average household spending ahead of an increase intheconsumption tax in October.
In east Asia, export volumes had been flat for several months. Other indicators of activity, suchasindustrial production and surveys of manufacturing conditions, had shown tentative signs ofstabilising.Growth in output had also slowed in India, driven by weakness in consumption. Members noted thatthepolitical unrest in Hong Kong had affected economic activity there to a significant extent.
In China, a range of indicators suggested that the pace of economic activity had slowed since thestartof the year. Economic indicators remained subdued in August, although they had recovered alittle frombroad-based weakness in July. Growth in industrial production and retail sales had edged higherinAugust, and fixed asset investment growth had been broadly unchanged. Conditions in housingmarkets alsoappeared to have softened. In response to the slowing in activity, the authorities had announcedfurthermeasures to ease policy in September. Chinese demand for imported iron ore and coal hadincreased, supported by ongoing investment in infrastructure.
The iron ore benchmark price had continued to be volatile since the previous meeting. Membersnotedthat supply concerns in the iron ore market had eased somewhat, and ongoing strength in Chinesesteeldemand had been met by an increase in iron ore imports. Oil prices had also been volatile, withtheattacks on oil infrastructure in Saudi Arabia having disrupted oil supply and exacerbateduncertainty inthe region.
Domestic Economic Conditions
Members noted that the main domestic economic news over the previous month had been the releaseof thenational accounts data for the June quarter and updates on the labour and housing markets. Onbalance, the data had pointed to a continuation of recent trends.
The national accounts reported that the Australian economy had grown by 0.5 per cent intheJune quarter. Year-ended growth had slowed to 1.4 per cent, the lowest outcome in adecade.Nevertheless, there had been a pick-up in quarterly GDP growth over the first half of 2019compared withthe second half of 2018. The pick-up had been driven by stronger growth in exports, led byexports ofresources and manufacturing goods. Members noted that export demand was being supported by thelowerlevel of the Australian dollar. Public demand had also been growing strongly, partly because ofspendingon the National Disability Insurance Scheme. Members observed that the drought had continued toaffectthe rural sector to a significant extent and that, as a result, farm output was expected toremain weakover the following year.
Growth in household disposable income had been subdued. Strong growth in income tax paid byhouseholdshad been a contributing factor, as had been low growth in non-labour income, partly reflectingtheeffects of the drought on the farm sector. By contrast, strong employment growth had boostedgrowth inlabour income.
Consistent with the ongoing low growth in household disposable income, household consumption hadincreased by only 1.4 per cent over the year to the end of June. Members noted thatthere hadnot yet been evidence of a pick-up in household spending following the recent reductions in thecashrate and receipt of the tax offset payments, although they acknowledged that it may be too earlytoexpect any signs of a pick-up. Retail sales had remained subdued in July and car sales haddecreased inAugust. Despite weak reported retail sales conditions generally, on a slightly more positivenote somecontacts in the Bank's liaison program had reported a mild pick-up in retail sales sinceJuly.Responses to consumer surveys in September had suggested that, on average, households planned tospendaround half of their lump-sum tax payments, broadly in line with what had been assumed in theBank's most recent forecasts.
The residential construction sector had contracted further and this was expected to continue forsometime. The decline in dwelling investment in the June quarter was greater than had been expecteda fewmonths earlier. Higher-density approvals had declined in July, to be at their lowest level insevenyears; detached approvals had also declined in July. The Bank's liaison program hadcontinued toreport weak pre-sales for higher-density developments. Taken together, this information impliedthatdwelling investment would decline further over coming quarters.
The turnaround in the established housing market had continued in September. Housing prices hadincreased further in Sydney and Melbourne, and auction clearance rates had remained high in bothcities.The pace of growth in housing prices had also picked up in some other capital cities in recentmonths.However, housing turnover had remained low.
Business investment had decreased a little in the June quarter, driven by a decline innon-residentialconstruction outside the mining sector. Nevertheless, the outlook for non-mining businessinvestmentremained favourable, supported by investment in infrastructure. Mining investment had picked uplargelyas expected. Members noted that mining investment was expected to continue to increasegradually, supported by projects both to sustain and to expand production. Survey measures of businessconditionshad remained around average in August; members noted that conditions in retailing were reportedto havebeen very weak, while conditions in the mining industry had remained well above average.
Conditions in the labour market had continued to be mixed. Employment growth in August hadremainedstronger than growth in the working-age population, and the employment-to-population ratio hadreachedits highest level since late 2008. Employment had increased by 2½ per cent overthepreceding year, the third successive year of strong employment growth. The participation ratehad alsoincreased to another record high. Members noted that the strong demand for labour had been metby anequally strong increase in supply. The unemployment rate had been around 5¼ per centsince April and the underemployment rate had remained above its recent low point. Looking ahead, jobvacancies and advertisements had declined, suggesting that employment growth would probablymoderateover the subsequent few quarters. Members noted that the ongoing subdued growth in wages impliedthatthere continued to be spare capacity in the labour market.
Financial Markets
Members noted that financial conditions remained accommodative internationally and in Australia.Several major central banks had eased policy in September and market pricing implied that marketparticipants expected the global economic expansion to be sustained by an extended period ofpolicystimulus. Expectations of further monetary easing had been partially scaled back in response totentative signs of progress in the trade and technology negotiations between the United Statesand Chinaand some better-than-expected US economic data. These developments had also supported the pricesofequities and corporate bonds.
As expected, the US Federal Reserve had reduced its policy rate again by 25 basis points inSeptember. The Federal Reserve had noted that, although the US economy had remained strong, easierpolicy was warranted given muted domestic inflation pressures, a weakening in global activityandpersistent downside risks. Members of the Federal Open Market Committee did not anticipate aprolongedeasing cycle, but continued to signal that they were willing to ease policy further if needed tosustaingrowth and meet the Federal Reserve's inflation objective. Market pricing suggested thatthefederal funds rate was expected to decline by a further 50 basis points or so by mid 2020, which was a little less than had previously been anticipated.
The European Central Bank (ECB) had delivered a package of stimulus measures in response toinflationbeing persistently below the ECB's target, protracted weakness in economic growth andcontinueddownside risks. The package included cutting the ECB's policy rate by 10 basis pointsto–0.5 per cent, exempting a portion of banks' excess reserves from negativedepositrates, committing to not lifting rates until inflation returned sustainably to target, renewingpurchases of government and private sector securities, and easing the conditions of the targetedlong-term refinancing operations designed to encourage banks to lend to the private sector.
The People's Bank of China had provided additional but targeted monetary stimulus, furthercuttingits reserve requirements, with larger adjustments for some smaller banks that are importantproviders offinance to small businesses. Chinese banks had also lowered the benchmark lending rate forcorporateborrowers slightly.
Government bond yields in major markets had risen a little, with yields in Australia followingsuit.Nonetheless, bond yields remained very low, with a large portion of bonds in Europe and Japantrading atnegative yields. Members noted that a sizeable proportion of the investors holding thesenegative-yielding bonds were constrained by their mandates or regulatory requirements, includingassetmanagers, banks, insurance companies and pension funds.
Members noted that financing conditions for corporations remained favourable globally. Equitypriceshad remained close to recent peaks, spreads on corporate bonds were low and issuance volumes hadbeenstrong. In Australia, the cost of capital for corporations had been quite stable for some years, although more recently it had declined a little. Members also discussed hurdle rates forbusinessinvestment, which had not changed much over recent times.
Major exchange rates had generally been little changed over September, with the US dollarhavingappreciated over the preceding two years or so on a trade-weighted basis. The Chinese renminbihadstabilised after its earlier depreciation, while the Japanese yen had depreciated, consistentwith someeasing of concerns about global risks. The Australian dollar had been little changed andremained aroundits lowest level in recent years.
In Australia, borrowing rates for households and businesses, as well as banks' fundingcosts, wereat historically low levels. Housing loan approvals to both owner-occupiers and investors hadincreasedin the three months to August, consistent with stronger conditions in some established housingmarkets.However, members noted that this increase in approvals had not yet translated into faster growthinhousing credit. The pace of growth in housing credit for owner-occupiers had been fairly steadysincethe beginning of the year and the stock of housing credit for investors had continued to declinealittle.
Financial market pricing indicated that a 25 basis points reduction in the cash rate waslargelypriced in for the October meeting, with a further reduction expected by mid 2020.
Financial Stability
Members were briefed on the Bank's regular half-yearly assessment of the financial system.
Globally, investors were accepting low rates of compensation for bearing risk, despite theincreasedchance of significantly weaker economic growth. Members noted that a sharp slowdown in globalgrowthcould result from an escalation of the US–China trade and technology disputes orgeopoliticaltensions in the Middle East, Hong Kong or the Korean peninsula. Central banks had eased monetarypolicyin response to the potential for weaker growth, and additional easing was expected by markets, leadingto falls in long-term government bond yields. Despite the increased uncertainty, risk premiumswere lowand in some cases had fallen further. The lower risk-free interest rates and low term, creditandliquidity risk premiums had seen many asset prices increase further. Any shock that causedmarkets toincrease risk premiums or revise upwards expectations of future policy rates, such as a pick-upininflation without accompanying stronger growth, could see a broad range of asset prices fall.Given debtlevels were high in some non-financial sectors in some economies, a fall in asset prices couldresult infinancial stress for some businesses and households, which could spill over to financialinstitutions.
Members observed that there had been strong growth in corporate debt in the United States, FranceandCanada, particularly lower-quality debt. Members noted that borrowers whose credit ratings fellbelowinvestment grade, and who relied on market-based finance, could face difficulty accessingfunding, givenmany investors' mandates were constrained by credit ratings. The interaction of highsovereign debtand less resilient banks in Japan and some European economies was also seen as a risk. However, in theUnited States and the United Kingdom, the resilience of the banking system had increased asprofitability had improved.
Corporate debt in China had increased sharply over the previous decade, although in relation toGDP ithad declined recently in response to policy measures to promote deleveraging. These measuresincludedclosing some unprofitable state-owned firms, restructuring some debt, reducing the size ofnon-bankfinancing and reducing non-banks' interactions with banks.
In Australia, near-term risks related to the housing market had eased in the preceding few monthswitha turnaround in housing prices in Sydney and Melbourne. Prices in those cities had fallen by alittleunder 10 per cent over the preceding 18 months, reducing the housing equity ofhouseholdsand resulting in a small share with negative equity. The recent increase in housing prices inthosecities had reduced the risk of large increases in negative equity, which could result in lossesforlenders if declines in income reduced households' ability to meet debt repayments. Half ofallloans in negative equity were in Western Australia and the Northern Territory, where housingpricedeclines had persisted over the previous few years. Members noted that the rate of mortgagearrears inWestern Australia had increased by more for riskier types of lending, including lending withsmallerdeposits, higher repayments relative to income, and loans to investors and self-employedborrowers.
Despite the high level of household debt in Australia relative to other countries, the risks fromhousehold debt appeared to be mostly contained. While the share of mortgages in arrears hadcontinued torise, it remained at a low rate relative to many other countries and in absolute terms. Inaddition, thequality of new lending had increased in recent years. The shares of loans with highloan-to-valuationratios and with interest-only repayment terms had declined following a focus by regulators onthishigher-risk lending. Further, members noted that households continued to have large prepaymentson theirhousing debt. In aggregate, mortgage prepayments were equal to two-and-a-half years ofrepayments.However, while one-third of borrowers had prepayments exceeding two years of mortgagerepayments, aslightly lower share had very little or no buffers. Of these, a little less than half appearedmorelikely to be vulnerable to shocks to their ability to meet their mortgage payments.
The resilience of Australian banks had increased since the financial crisis. Banks had largelycompleted their transition to their higher ‘unquestionably strong’ capital ratios.Banks' resilience would increase further with the introduction by the Australian PrudentialRegulation Authority of a Loss Absorbing Capacity (LAC) regime, which will require banks toraise anadditional 3 percentage points of capital by 2024. Members observed that banks were alreadyissuingnew Tier 2 securities to meet their LAC requirements. Banks' profitability haddeclined alittle over the prior year or two, although banks remained highly profitable. The increase inhousingarrears had resulted in a small decline in banks' overall asset quality, although assetqualityremained high. Rates of non-performing business loans were a little below rates for housingloans.
Members also discussed non-financial risks facing the financial system. Members noted that cyberrisks, and IT risks more broadly, were increasing as technology systems become more complex andembedded in alloperations. Members also noted that climate change presented a risk to financial institutions.Whileextreme weather events were thought unlikely to produce large losses for the financial system asawhole, at least at present, losses could be larger in future if financial institutions do notmanage therisks carefully.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the risks to the global growth outlookremained tilted to the downside. The trade and technology disputes between the United States andChinawere affecting international trade and investment, as businesses scaled back their spendingplans inresponse to increased uncertainty. In China, the authorities had taken further steps to supporttheeconomy, while continuing to address risks in the financial system. In most advanced economies, inflation remained subdued despite low unemployment rates and rising wages growth.
In this context, global interest rates had continued to decline, with the central banks in theUnitedStates and Europe reducing interest rates in the previous month. Further monetary easing waswidelyexpected, as central banks continued to respond to the downside risks to the global economy andsubduedinflation. Long-term government bond yields were close to record lows in many countries, including inAustralia. Borrowing rates for both businesses and households were at historically low levels, and theAustralian dollar was at its lowest level in recent years.
Members considered the case for a further easing in monetary policy at the present meeting, tosupportemployment and income growth and to provide greater confidence that inflation would beconsistent withthe medium-term target. Members noted that the Bank's most recent forecasts suggested thattheunemployment and inflation outcomes over the following couple of years were likely to be shortof theBank's goals. The most recent run of data had not materially altered this assessment and, onbalance, had been on the softer side. The ongoing subdued rate of wages growth also suggestedthat theeconomy still had spare capacity. There was therefore a case to respond to the general outlookwith afurther easing of monetary policy.
Members were mindful, however, that monetary policy was already expansionary and that the lowerexchange rate was also supporting growth. They acknowledged that these factors and the recenttax cutscould combine to boost growth by more than their individual effects would imply, especiallygiven thecontext of the mining and established housing sectors seeming to have reached turning points. Atthesame time, members recognised that it was possible that the effects may be smaller than expectedand theglobal risks were to the downside.
Members also considered the argument that some monetary stimulus should be kept in reserve toaddressany future negative shocks. However, that argument requires changes in interest rates to be thekeydriver of demand, rather than the level of interest rates, which experience has shown to be themoreimportant determinant. Members concluded that the Board could reduce the likelihood of anegative shockleading to outcomes that materially undershot the Bank's goals by strengthening thestarting pointfor the economy.
The Board's discussions also focused on the ongoing strength in employment growth. Theperiod ofstrong employment growth had not reduced spare capacity in the labour market significantly.Almost allof the strength in employment growth over the preceding three years had been matched by higherparticipation, so there had been little progress on reducing unemployment and underemployment.It wasalso possible that participation was rising partly in response to weak growth in incomes.Moreover, employment growth was forecast to slow over the period ahead.
Members also discussed the possibility that policy stimulus might be less effective than pastexperience suggests. They recognised that some transmission channels, such as a pick-up inborrowing orthe effect on the home-building sector, may not be operating in the same way as in the past, andthatthe negative effect of low interest rates on the income and confidence of savers might be moresignificant. Notwithstanding this, transmission through the exchange rate channel was stillconsideredlikely to work effectively, and evidence suggested that the positive effects of lower interestrates onaggregate household cash flows via lower debt repayments was likely to support householdspending, giventhat household interest payments exceed receipts by more than two to one.
Members also noted that the housing market and other asset prices might be overly inflated bylowerinterest rates. Members acknowledged that asset prices were part of the transmission mechanismofpolicy, including by encouraging home building. By themselves, higher asset prices wereconsideredunlikely to present a risk to macroeconomic and financial stability. This assessment would needto bereviewed if rapidly increasing asset prices were accompanied by materially faster credit growth, weaklending standards and rising leverage. Although household debt was still considered high, members sawonly a limited risk of excessive borrowing at the current juncture: household disposable incomegrowth(and thus borrowing capacity) is weak; the memory of recent housing price falls is still fresh;andbanks are still quite cautious in their appetite to lend. Nonetheless, members assessed thatclosemonitoring of this risk was warranted.
Members concluded that these various factors did not outweigh the case for a further easing ofmonetarypolicy at the present meeting. Taking into account all the available information, including thereductions in interest rates since the middle of the year, the Board decided to lower the cashrate by afurther 25 basis points. Members judged that lower interest rates would help reduce sparecapacityin the economy by supporting employment and income growth and providing greater confidence thatinflation would be consistent with the medium-term target. Members also noted the trend to lowerinterest rates globally and the effect this was having on the Australian economy and inflationoutcomes.
Members judged it reasonable to expect that an extended period of low interest rates would berequiredin Australia to reach full employment and achieve the inflation target. The Board would continuetomonitor developments, including in the labour market, and was prepared to ease monetary policyfurtherif needed to support sustainable growth in the economy, full employment and the achievement oftheinflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to lower the cash rate by 25 basis points to 0.75 per cent.