Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 1 September 2020
Members Participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Members granted leave of absence to Wendy Craik AM in terms of section 18A of the Reserve BankAct 1959.
Others Participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment)
International Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by noting that the global economy hadstarted to recover around May as containment measures were eased and the extensive fiscal and monetarysupport had begun to take effect. However, more recently the global recovery had slowed and become moreuneven, with infection rates rising again in some countries; further fresh outbreaks of the virus hadbeen seen in Japan, South Korea, some countries in Western Europe and New Zealand. This had led to atargeted tightening in restrictions, and some renewed signs of precautionary behaviour. Consistent withthis, mobility indicators had flattened out. Members noted that the future path of the global recoverywould remain highly dependent on containment of the virus.
The first half of 2020 had seen the largest contraction in global economic activity in many decades.The extent of the declines in GDP varied significantly across economies, depending on the severity ofthe pandemic and the intensity of the containment measures. Some countries had experienced contractionsof around 20 per cent in the first half of the year, although the decline in output inAustralia was expected to have been less severe.
In turning to labour market outcomes in advanced economies, members noted that total hours workedremained 5–10 per cent below pre-pandemic levels, despite having increased recently.The extent to which lower total hours worked had been accounted for by reductions in average hoursand/or employment depended in large part on the scope of wage subsidies and other fiscal supportschemes. It was noted that in the United States most of the decline had been in the form of feweremployees rather than lower average hours worked. This was because, unlike in most other advancedeconomies, income support in the United States had mostly comprised increased unemployment benefitsrather than wage subsidies.
Members discussed the severe disruptions to global trade flows that had been experienced since theoutbreak of the pandemic, as seen in the sharp contraction in exports and imports in many economies.This had also been evident in Australian trade volumes. While the shock to aggregate demand had beencentral to the decline in global trade flows, disruptions to supply stemming from health measures hadalso affected the ability of some economies to produce exports. China had been less affected than mosteconomies in this regard, with production and exports both having rebounded strongly.
Members noted that in China production had rebounded much more strongly than consumption, which had notbeen the typical pattern of recovery observed in other economies. Differences in the emphasis of fiscalpolicy support had largely accounted for this. In China, policy support had been aimed mainly atsupporting businesses and stimulating investment; income transfers to households had been modest. As aresult, fixed asset investment and industrial production had returned to pre-pandemic levels, whileconsumption had recovered at a slower pace. In advanced economies, household income transfers hadfeatured much more prominently in fiscal support packages, which had supported household disposableincome and consumption to a greater extent than production.
Recent inflation outcomes around the world had reflected a combination of factors. In addition to theeffects of a large negative aggregate demand shock, these outcomes reflected a significant shift indemand towards goods, lower demand for services and disruptions to supply. The net of these factors hadbeen subdued overall inflationary pressure. However, prices for some goods, such as food, motor vehicles& parts and household furnishings, had risen at a solid pace in some countries.
Members also noted that large shifts in the demand for and supply of commodities had been occurring. Ofmost relevance to Australia, iron ore prices had been around multi-year highs. Demand for iron ore fromChina had been strong given that steel-intensive activity such as construction had bounced back quickly.Ongoing supply issues in Brazil had also supported iron ore prices. Gold prices had recently traded atall-time highs, partly reflecting increased investment demand in an environment of low global interestrates. By contrast, coal prices had been around multi-year lows, reflecting lower demand in India andelsewhere, and abundant global supply. In terms of key resource export volumes, members noted thatAustralian exports of iron ore to China had remained resilient in recent months.
Domestic Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion of domestic economic conditions by noting that the contraction inJune quarter GDP in Australia was expected to be less severe than in many other countries and broadly inline with projections in the August Statement on Monetary Policy. However, it was expectedthat the national accounts (scheduled for release the day after the meeting) would confirm the economyhad experienced its largest single-quarter contraction in the history of the quarterly nationalaccounts.
Recent data indicated that non-mining business investment in the June quarter had not been as weak asearlier feared, particularly spending on machinery & equipment. However, non-mining and mininginvestment intentions for 2020/21 had been little changed from threemonths prior, and had continued to indicate a very weak outlook for capital expenditure overall.
Members noted that household consumption had contracted significantly in the June quarter, with thedecline in April having been particularly steep. Since then, consumption had started to recover, but wasstill well below pre-pandemic levels. Restrictions on activity had constrained spending in Victoria, with retail spending there much weaker than in the rest of the country. Business liaison and otherhigher frequency indicators suggested retail sales had declined significantly in Victoria in August.Members noted that spending on other services in Victoria would also be severely affected during thelockdowns. Overall, household consumption in Australia was still expected to increase in the Septemberquarter, but this would only partly reverse the contraction that had been experienced earlier in theyear.
In their discussion of the housing market, members noted that prices for established dwellings inMelbourne and, to a lesser extent, Sydney had declined in recent months, but price movements had beenmixed elsewhere. The cumulative decline in established national housing prices in 2020 had been lessthan experienced two years earlier. Meanwhile, rental markets had remained weak. Rental supply had beenboosted by short-term and holiday rentals being brought onto the long-term rental market, while demandhad been depressed by the reduced flow of new migrants and a decline in the rate of household formation.Rental vacancy rates had risen recently, and members noted that downward pressure on rents was unlikelyto dissipate in the near term in either Sydney or Melbourne.
Turning to the labour market, members observed that the increase in employment in July had beenstronger than generally expected, but not enough to prevent a rise in the unemployment rate. The numberof people who had left the labour force during the June quarter but were now actively searching for workhad increased. This was expected to continue through the remainder of 2020 as restrictions on activityand health concerns eased and mutual obligations under the JobSeeker program were reinstated. Measuresof labour underutilisation had eased, but remained very high. It was noted that around half of thecontraction in total hours worked had been reversed in preceding months, with average hours picking upmore quickly than employment. Many part-time workers had reverted to working their usual hours afterhaving been on low or zero hours earlier in the year.
More timely payroll data suggested the number of jobs in the weeks up to early August had declined alittle, with a notable drop in jobs in Victoria. The recent decline in Victoria had erased much of therecovery in jobs between April and June. Outside of Victoria, the recovery in jobs appeared to haveslowed.
Members observed that the 1.8 per cent increase in the wage price index over the year to Junewas the lowest rate of growth in the history of the series. In discussing the subdued private wagesgrowth outcomes in the June quarter, members noted that firms had responded more swiftly than inprevious downturns to the weakening in demand by slowing the pace of wage increases. In some industries, such as construction, professional services and some other service industries, a small number of largewage reductions had contributed to a decline for the industry in aggregate. Business liaison contactshad also suggested that firms were more likely to have instituted wage freezes than in the past, andthat it was not uncommon for senior managers and executives in some industries to have experiencedtemporary wage cuts. Wage and price pressures more generally were expected to remain subdued for sometime.
Members noted the important role that fiscal policy had played in supporting the economy since theoutbreak of the pandemic. Income transfers to households from the Australian Government had provided asubstantial boost to household income and consumption, as well as to business cash flows. Members alsonoted that state and territory governments had played important roles in complementing these incometransfers in the period ahead, mainly by increasing direct spending on goods and services and jobcreation. Governments at this level had considerable experience to draw on in service delivery, employment and implementing direct purchases of goods and services. They also accounted for a largershare of public demand than the Australian Government. Members noted that debt levels relative to thesize of the economy were low for the Australian and state governments. Overall, public sector balancesheets in Australia were assessed as being strong. In an environment of record low borrowing rates andsignificant spare capacity in the economy, this meant fiscal policy was well placed to continue tosupport the recovery.
International Financial Markets
Members noted that global financial conditions had remained accommodative, supported by substantialpolicy stimulus. Central banks had continued to emphasise that they would maintain the current easystance of monetary policies for some time and provide further stimulus if required. In August, theReserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) had increased the total size and extended the duration of itsgovernment bond purchase program. At the same time, the RBNZ had been considering a negative policy rateand an expanded term funding scheme.
The US Federal Reserve had announced that, following a comprehensive review of its monetary policyframework, it would now pursue a flexible average inflation target and increase the emphasis placed onachieving maximum employment. Most commentators had concluded that this implied the Federal Reservewould maintain a stimulatory monetary policy stance for longer than initially thought and untilinflation was moderately above 2 per cent for a time.
Government bond yields had remained historically low across advanced economies, although yields hadincreased a little over the preceding month. Market-implied inflation expectations had increasedsteadily to be around the levels last seen at the beginning of 2020. Accordingly, yields had declined inreal terms over prior months and were at very low levels, consistent with very stimulatory policysettings.
Equity prices in major markets had increased further over August. This partly reflected the fact thatthe fall in corporate earnings in the first half of 2020 had been smaller than initially feared.Investors had also appeared to expect the declines in corporate earnings to be short-lived. The highlevel of equity prices had also reflected low discount rates, consistent with the low level of bondyields. Members noted that when total returns – which include dividend payments – weretaken into account, Australian equities had performed similarly to equity markets in most other advancedeconomies, apart from the United States, where equity markets had outperformed.
Corporations across the major economies had continued to benefit from accommodative funding conditionsin debt markets. Spreads on corporate bonds had remained low and bond issuance had been relativelystrong in the United States. Business credit growth had been strong following the onset of the pandemic, but had eased over recent months. Members noted that there had been some tightening in banks'lending standards for business borrowers, and discussed the relative importance of demand and supplyfactors for business credit in the current environment.
In China, the authorities had indicated their comfort with the current stance of monetary policy andhad re-emphasised their focus on managing medium-term financial stability risks, such as high leverage.The authorities had also signalled their concern about non-performing loans in the period ahead. TheChinese renminbi had been relatively stable, despite ongoing tensions between the United States andChina.
Financial conditions in emerging markets had been relatively stable, particularly in Asia. Membersnoted, however, that some emerging economies, including Brazil, Russia, South Africa and Turkey, hadexperienced volatility in their financial markets and exchange rates in recent months; these economieshad existing macroeconomic vulnerabilities before the COVID-19pandemic.
The US dollar had depreciated significantly against the currencies of other advanced economiesover recent months, including the Australian dollar. In part, this reflected an unwinding of the earlierappreciation of the US dollar related to an episode of financial market volatility in March andApril during which investors had sought less risky investments. The appreciation of the Australiandollar had been consistent with the increase in commodity prices, particularly iron ore prices, overrecent months. While members noted that the Australian dollar was broadly aligned with its fundamentaldeterminants, a lower exchange rate would provide more assistance to the Australian economy in itsrecovery.
Domestic Financial Markets
In Australia, the Board's policy measures continued to underpin accommodative financialconditions. Reflecting the large amount of liquidity in the system, the cash rate had remained verylow, at around 13 basis points, and investors expected it to remain at that level for some time.Similarly, money market rates had remained very low.
The Bank had purchased about $10 billion of Australian Government Securities (AGS) in August insupport of the 3-year yield target for AGS of around 25 basis points. Following the Bank'spurchases, the yield on the AGS bond maturing in April 2023, which is currently the bond with amaturity closest to three years, had declined to be closer to 25 basis points. Members noted thatthe focus of the yield target will increasingly shift to the April 2024 bond, which will become thebond with a maturity closest to three years in the second half of October 2020. Government bond marketshad continued to function smoothly, with large issuance by the Australian Government and states met byconsistently strong demand.
Banks' funding costs were at historic lows and banks had good access to funding. Take-up of theReserve Bank's Term Funding Facility (TFF) had continued to pick up as the end-September deadlinefor drawing initial allocations approached. Banks had also continued to receive large inflows ofdeposits, another relatively low-cost source of funding. The increase in funding from the TFF andlow-cost deposits had been partly offset by banks not replacing wholesale bond funding as it matured;much of the decline in bank bonds on issue this year had been concentrated in bonds issuedoffshore.
The cash rate reductions and other policy measures had flowed through to interest rates on businessloans, which were historically low. Members observed that, nevertheless, demand for business loans hadremained subdued, reflecting the weakness in economic conditions and the high level of uncertainty.Large businesses had repaid the bulk of the funds obtained from existing credit lines in March andApril, while lending to small and medium-sized enterprises had been little changed for some time.Interest rates on housing loans had also been at historic lows. Over half of the decline in the cashrate since February had flowed through to variable rates, and fixed housing loan rates had declined byeven more. There had been a large amount of refinancing activity, with a greater-than-usual share ofborrowers moving to fixed-rate home loans.
Growth in housing credit to owner-occupiers had eased in recent months to around 5 per centon an annualised basis, while housing credit to investors had continued to decline. This largelyreflected reduced demand from borrowers, given the weak and uncertain economic environment and itseffect on the housing market. Housing loan commitments had increased over June and July, but hadremained below their recent peak. Payments into offset and redraw accounts had increased substantiallyin July. This partly reflected the early release of superannuation funds to some households at thebeginning of the new financial year, along with government payments and tax refunds. In locations wheremovement had been restricted, this had also reflected fewer opportunities for spending.
Members noted that, in addition to weak demand for household and business borrowing, the supply ofcredit had also tightened somewhat since earlier in the year, reflecting the uncertain economicoutlook. Banks had been offering extensions of loan deferral periods where appropriate and generallyhad been encouraging borrowers to make repayments if they could afford to do so.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economy had been experiencing anuneven recovery after a very severe contraction in the first half of 2020. Some economies with high orrising COVID-19 infection rates had recently lost momentum. In contrast, economic growth had been relatively strong in China. The future path of the recovery was highlydependent on containment of the virus.
The Australian economy had been going through a very difficult period and was experiencing the biggestshock to economic activity since the 1930s. Nevertheless, members noted that the downturn had not beenas severe as earlier expected and a recovery was under way in most of Australia. However, the recoverywas likely to be uneven, with the COVID-19 outbreak in Victoria having amajor effect on the economy. Uncertainty about the health situation and the future path of the economywas continuing to affect the spending plans of many households and businesses. Wage and price pressuresremained subdued and this was likely to continue for some time.
Members agreed that the Board's policy package implemented in mid March was continuing to supportthe Australian economy. There was a very high level of liquidity in the Australian financial system andthe policy package had helped to lower funding costs. Members noted that the Australian banking system, with its strong capital and liquidity buffers, had remained resilient and was helping the economytraverse this difficult period.
Over the prior month, the Bank had purchased AGS in support of the Board's 3-year yield target ofaround 25 basis points, and members agreed that further purchases should be undertaken as necessaryto maintain the target. Government bond markets had been operating effectively, alongside a significantincrease in issuance. The Bank stood ready to purchase AGS and semi-government securities in the eventof a recurrence of market dysfunction.
Members reviewed the operation of the TFF, given the uncertain economic outlook and that the initialallowance of 3 per cent of credit had to be drawn down by the end of September 2020. Theyagreed that the TFF had worked as intended and that, given the economic outlook, an expansion of the TFFwas appropriate. In particular, the Board agreed to increase the size of the TFF and allow drawing offunds up until June 2021. Under an expanded TFF, authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) wouldhave access to additional funding, equivalent to 2 per cent of their outstanding credit, at afixed rate of 25 basis points for three years. ADIs would be able to draw on this extra fundinguntil the end of June 2021. This extension would ensure that all ADIs continued to have access to theTFF after the end of September 2020. The availability of additional allowances associated with anADI's growth of business credit would also be extended beyond the end of March 2021 to the end ofJune 2021. This further easing of monetary policy would bring the total amount available under thisfacility to around $200 billion. This would help keep interest rates low for borrowers and supportthe provision of credit by providing ADIs greater confidence about their continued access to low-costfunding.
Members recognised that the substantial, coordinated and unprecedented easing of fiscal and monetarypolicy in Australia was helping to sustain the economy through this difficult period. Members noted thatpublic sector balance sheets in Australia were strong, which allowed for the provision of continuedsupport. They considered it likely that fiscal and monetary support would be required for some timegiven the outlook for the economy and the labour market. The Board affirmed its commitment to supportingjobs, incomes and businesses in Australia. It agreed to maintain highly accommodative settings as longas required and to continue to consider how further monetary measures could support the recovery.
The Decision
The Board reaffirmed the elements of the policy package announced on 19 March 2020, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.25 per centa target of 0.25 per cent for the yield on 3-year Australian Government bondsthe Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small and medium-sizedbusinessesan interest rate of 10 basis points on Exchange Settlement balances held by financialinstitutions at the Bank.
The Board agreed to increase the size of the Term Funding Facility and make the facility available forlonger.
The Board reaffirmed that the yield target for 3-year bonds would be maintained until progress is madetowards the Bank's goals of full employment and the inflation target, and that it would beappropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rate itself is raised. The Board also reaffirmedthat it would not increase the cash rate target until progress is made towards full employment and it isconfident that inflation will be sustainably within the 2–3 per cent target band.