Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 2 April 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AM, Catherine Tanna
Others Present
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic AnalysisDepartment), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Financial Stability Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Secretary)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion by noting that the slower pace of global economic activity hadcontinued in recent months. This had been particularly evident in the manufacturing sector. Surveymeasures of conditions in the manufacturing sector had declined across a range of economies, althoughthey had ticked up in China in March. Slower external demand, especially from China, had continued toweigh on export growth and the manufacturing sectors in the trade-exposed economies of east Asia, Japanand the euro area. In east Asia, the electronics cycle had turned, which had affected theregion's exports as well as investment in those economies with sizeable semi-conductorsectors.
Recent trade talks between the United States and China had taken on a somewhat more positive tone.However, the United States had also said it would consider imposing restrictions on automotive imports, which would affect large car exporters, including Germany and Japan.
In the major advanced economies, however, domestic demand conditions had remained positive, supportedby an easing in financial conditions since the beginning of 2019, and were consistent with growth beingaround, or even above, potential. Underlying inflation had remained close to target in a number ofadvanced economies, but global headline inflation had declined since late 2018 because of the fall inoil prices.
Growth in consumption in the advanced economies had been supported by ongoing tightness in labourmarkets, which had led to an upward trend in wages growth over a number of years. In the United States, the unemployment rate had remained below levels consistent with full employment and employers had beenfinding it increasingly difficult to find suitable labour. Members observed that most sectors of the USlabour market had experienced strong conditions and the pick-up in wages growth had been most pronouncedfor lower-income workers.
In Japan, consumption was expected to be supported by a bring-forward of spending ahead of an increasein the consumption tax in October 2019, as well as ongoing tightness in the labour market. In the euroarea, the unemployment rate had been declining gradually and wage pressures had increased. However, employment intentions had eased in the euro area and, more sharply, in the United Kingdom in the contextof ongoing uncertainty around Britain's exit from the European Union.
The outlook for investment across the major advanced economies had been more mixed. In the UnitedStates, investment indicators had eased a little but remained above average, while investment in theeuro area had weakened further. Members noted that political uncertainty in the United Kingdom and theeuro area was weighing on investment in those economies. In Japan, survey measures suggested thatbusiness conditions would remain strong despite a prospective moderation in investment growth.
In China, growth in domestic demand had slowed. At its March meeting, the National People'sCongress had set a target of 6–6.5 per cent for growth in output in 2019, which wasbelow the target of around 6.5 per cent in 2018. Members noted signs that stimulus measuresimplemented by the authorities over recent months were having an impact: growth in total socialfinancing had increased a little, after slowing over the preceding year, and growth in infrastructureinvestment and retail spending had recovered. Residential construction activity had also increased.However, some recent indicators of production and investment in the manufacturing sector, which is moreexposed to external demand, had been subdued. Exports from China to the United States had continued todecline, but China's imports from the United States had increased a little over the first fewmonths of 2019, after an earlier sharp decline. Australian coal shipments had continued to be affectedby customs delays at Chinese ports.
Australia's terms of trade had increased in the December quarter to be around6 per cent higher over 2018. The terms of trade were expected to have increased further in theMarch quarter, although commodity price developments had been mixed since the previous meeting. Bulkcommodity prices had been little changed because falls in coal prices had been largely offset by anincrease in iron ore prices. Oil prices had risen, but were still 20 per cent below theirrecent peak in October 2018. Reflecting oil price movements in late 2018, liquefied natural gas (LNG)prices were expected to have declined over the first quarter of 2019. Other commodity prices had beenlittle changed over the previous month.
Domestic Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of the domestic economy by observing that growth had slowed markedlyin the second half of 2018 compared with the first half. GDP had increased by 0.2 per cent inthe December quarter and by 2.3 per cent over the year, which was below the forecastspresented in the February Statement on Monetary Policy. The soft December quarter outcomepartly reflected another weak quarter of consumption growth and a larger-than-expected fall in dwellinginvestment. It also reflected some temporary factors, such as the weather-related disruption to resourceexports and the effect of the drought. Public demand and non-mining investment had supported outputgrowth. Members noted that the income-based measure of GDP growth had been particularly weak over thepreceding year, while the expenditure-based measure had been stronger.
Growth in consumption had clearly slowed in the second half of 2018. The weakness had been concentratedin discretionary items, especially those that have historically been most correlated with housing pricesand housing turnover, such as motor vehicles and home furnishings. Retail sales data and contacts in theBank's liaison program suggested that growth in housing-related consumption had remained soft inrecent months.
Members noted that growth in household disposable income, which is an important driver of consumptiongrowth, had been subdued for a number of years. In 2018, labour income growth had been above the verylow rates seen in recent years, supported by a pick-up in growth in average hourly earnings andcontinued employment growth, but non-labour income growth had remained weak. Members observed that taxpayments by households had been growing noticeably faster than income growth in recent years, partlybecause of efforts to increase tax compliance.
Dwelling investment appeared to have passed its peak, although there continued to be uncertainty abouthow quickly dwelling investment might decline over the forecast period. Construction of new dwellingshad contracted in the second half of 2018; the largest falls in the December quarter had been forapartments in New South Wales and detached housing in Queensland. Slower housing activity had alsoweighed on the incomes of some building contractors and property professionals in the December quarter.There continued to be a large amount of work in the pipeline, which should support a relatively highlevel of building activity in the near term. Members noted that there had been a substantial rise inbuilding approvals for high-density residential projects in February, although this series was volatileand in trend terms remained well below earlier peaks. Members also noted that population growth wasexpected to continue to support demand for housing over the medium term.
Conditions in the established housing market had remained weak in recent months. Housing prices hadcontinued to fall in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth, and had declined a little in most other capital citiesand regional areas. In March, Sydney prices were 13 per cent below their 2017 peak andMelbourne prices were 10 per cent below their peak. Although auction clearance rates in Sydneyand Melbourne had increased over the first quarter of 2019, they remained at relatively low levels.Members noted that in Perth, housing prices had declined over the previous year, while the rentalvacancy rate had declined sharply and there were signs that newly advertised rents were starting toincrease. By contrast, rental vacancies in Sydney had risen, particularly in suburbs where the supply ofnew apartments had increased significantly.
Non-mining business investment had grown solidly in the December quarter, with non-residentialconstruction having made the largest contribution to growth in the quarter, driven partly by stronggrowth in private sector infrastructure projects, such as roads and renewable energy. Forward-lookingindicators, such as the substantial amount of work still to be done on private infrastructure projects, the relatively high level of non-residential building approvals and positive business investmentintentions, pointed to further growth in non-mining business investment. Survey measures of businessconditions had declined in late 2018, but had stabilised at above-average levels.
Mining activity had subtracted from growth in the second half of 2018, mainly reflecting ongoingdeclines in mining investment as remaining LNG projects approached completion. Members noted thatinvestment required to sustain capacity and recently announced expansion projects were expected tosupport stronger mining investment over the medium term. Declines in resource exports, partly related tosupply disruptions, had also subtracted from growth in the second half of 2018. Coal exports to Chinahad declined by 20 per cent, partly as a result of weather-related disruptions. The longertime taken for imports of coal to clear Chinese customs in recent months was also likely to have playeda role. Liaison contacts had reported that they expected to continue to be able to redirect coalshipments intended for China to other destinations. Members noted that there had been some disruptionsto iron ore shipments as a result of Tropical Cyclone Veronica, which were likely to have affected ironore export volumes in March.
The ongoing effects of the drought had weighed on farm output and income in the December quarter, andrural exports had declined; farm GDP had fallen by more than 6 per cent over the second halfof 2018. Based on the latest estimates from the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economicsand Sciences, farm production was expected to improve gradually in 2019/20assuming rainfall returned to average levels. This was a more favourable outlook than had been assumedin the forecasts presented in the February Statement on Monetary Policy. However, membersnoted that shortages of water in the Murray-Darling Basin had been severe and that it would takesignificant rainfall to increase soil moisture content from current low levels in this region.
Public demand had contributed strongly to GDP growth over 2018, supported by spending on the NationalDisability Insurance Scheme and aged care and health services, and investment in infrastructure. Membersnoted that, despite this, the overall fiscal impact on the economy had been negative because of slowgrowth in some other forms of government expenditure and strong growth in tax revenues.
The labour market had continued to improve in early 2019, despite the slowing in growth recorded in thenational accounts through 2018. Employment had increased a little in February, following strong growthin January, and the unemployment rate had declined to 4.9 per cent, continuing the run ofmonths with an unemployment rate at or around 5 per cent. Other measures of spare capacity, including the underemployment rate and the long-term unemployment rate, had also trended downwards. Theparticipation rate had been relatively stable at a high level over the preceding year or so.
Employment growth over the previous year had been particularly strong in the health care & socialassistance, professional services and construction industries. Over the same period, employment-to-population ratios had increased further in New South Wales and Victoria, whereunemployment rates had been around historically low levels. Employment-to-population ratios had declineda little in other states more recently. Forward-looking indicators of labour demand had been mixed inrecent months. Job advertisements had eased, but job vacancies reported by employers through the ABSsurvey had increased further as a share of the labour force in February.
Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of financial market developments by noting that global financialconditions remained accommodative and had eased over the preceding couple of months.
Market expectations for the future path of monetary policy in a number of economies had been loweredsince the beginning of the year. This was consistent with guidance from major central banks thatmonetary policy would remain more accommodative than earlier expected, given downward revisions togrowth forecasts and little upside risk to inflation despite increasingly tight labour markets.
At its March meeting, the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) had kept the federal funds rateunchanged and announced that the decline in the Federal Reserve's asset holdings would slow fromMay and cease after September, which was sooner than had been expected. The FOMC also published thequarterly update of its members' projections for where they believed the federal funds rate waslikely to be in coming years. These projections implied that the federal funds rate was likely to remainunchanged throughout the rest of 2019, followed by one increase (of 25 basis points) in 2020. Bycontrast, at the time of the December 2018 meeting, the median FOMC projection had been for two rateincreases in 2019 and one in 2020. Policy expectations implied by financial market pricing had also beenrevised down since December. These implied that the next move in the federal funds rate was expected tobe down.
In the euro area and Japan, financial market pricing indicated that policy rates were expected to bemaintained at very low levels for an extended period, in line with recent statements by the respectivecentral banks. In March, the European Central Bank had announced that it would roll over a long-termlending program to euro area banks. In Canada, New Zealand and Australia, financial market pricingimplied that declines in policy rates were expected in the coming year or so.
Members noted that 10-year government bond yields had declined noticeably across all major markets overthe preceding month. In some cases, including in Australia, yields had declined to historic lows. Thesedeclines had reflected lower expected paths for monetary policy, lower term premiums and, to varyingextents, lower inflation expectations. In Germany and Japan, long-term bond yields had again turnednegative, approaching the lows that had been reached in 2016. In the United States, long-term rates hadmoved below some short-term rates for a brief period, with market commentators noting that past episodesof yield curve inversion had tended to precede recessions. At the same time, the recent decline in riskpremiums in credit and equity markets suggested financial market participants did not consider arecession to be likely.
Members observed that financing conditions for corporations had improved. Corporate bond yields hadmoved lower, reflecting the decline in government bond yields as well as a decline in spreads followingincreases in late 2018. Non-financial firms had increased their bond issuance in 2019, particularly inthe US dollar high-yield sector. By contrast, issuance of leveraged loans had been more subdued, whichpartly reflected an easing in investors' appetites for floating rate securities in response tothe lowering of policy rate expectations. Equity markets in the advanced economies had been littlechanged in March, having previously rebounded from their sharp fall in late 2018.
In China, equity markets had risen particularly sharply since the end of 2018, which was likely to havereflected some easing in US–China trade tensions, as well as the authorities' stimulusmeasures. Growth in total social financing had increased a little in recent months, as the authoritieshad taken measures to encourage bond issuance. They had also encouraged banks to provide finance tosmaller private firms. To support this, the authorities had signalled additional targeted monetaryeasing for the period ahead. These changes had followed a slowing in the growth of total socialfinancing over the preceding year or more as the authorities had taken measures to reduce non-banklending, which had been an important source of funding for private firms, in order to reduce overallrisks in the financial system.
In other emerging markets, conditions had been relatively stable in 2019, although Argentina and Turkeyhad experienced renewed depreciation of their exchange rates in response to continued macro-financialand political risks in those economies.
Members noted that there had been little change in major economies' foreign exchange marketsover the preceding month. The Australian dollar had also been little changed, remaining at the lower endof its range of recent years. The strength in commodity prices and the terms of trade had beensupporting the exchange rate, while the continued decline in Australian government bond yields relativeto those in other major markets had been working in the opposite direction.
Growth in housing lending to owner-occupiers had slowed to 4¾ per cent insix-month-ended annualised terms, although the monthly growth rate had increased slightly in February.Growth in housing lending to investors remained at a very low level. Housing loan approvals werematerially below the levels of a year earlier, but had also increased slightly in February, with thesmall uptick in approvals broadly based across types of borrowers. Members observed that the slowing inhousing lending over the preceding year had been driven largely by weakness in demand, particularly frominvestors. There had also been some tightening in lending practices. Lenders continued to compete forborrowers of high credit quality by offering lower interest rates on new loans than typically paid onexisting loans.
Members noted that the major banks' funding costs had declined over the preceding couple ofmonths. The cost of debt funding had declined as pressures had eased in short-term money markets andbank bond spreads had narrowed. Deposit rates had also continued to edge downwards.
Funding conditions for Australian businesses more broadly were accommodative. Three-year bond yieldsfor corporations across all major sectors had declined to record lows, reflecting the decline in bothgovernment bond yields and spreads. Bond issuance by non-financial corporations in the first quarter of2019 had been in line with that of recent years. Growth in bank lending to businesses had remainedrobust, in part reflecting increased lending by the major banks, although other institutions hadaccounted for most of the growth. Members observed that the growth in business lending had been entirelyto large businesses. Meanwhile, credit conditions for some small businesses were reported to havetightened further recently.
Financial market participants' expectations of a rate cut had been brought forward followingweaker than expected data, most notably the December quarter national accounts. Financial market pricingimplied that the cash rate was expected to be lowered in the second half of 2019 and then again in2020.
Financial Stability
Members were briefed on the Bank's regular half-yearly assessment of the financial system.Overall, members noted that financial stability risks were slightly higher than six months earlier butwere not especially elevated.
Globally, investors were receiving little compensation for taking on risk. Notably, risk-free rateswere very low and the term premium in the United States had briefly turned negative. Furthermore, corporate bond spreads remained low. These conditions had contributed to the significant increase inborrowing by businesses since the global financial crisis. However, members noted that debt servicingcosts had not increased to the same extent, given the decline in interest rates over this period. Thehigh prices of a range of assets in this environment meant that there was heightened risk of an abruptrepricing in response to news.
Members observed that the profitability of banks globally had generally increased. In part, thisreflected above-trend economic growth in the first half of 2018. However, some European banks remainedfragile, given large stocks of non-performing loans, high cost structures and overcapacity. The largestock of sovereign debt held by some European banks, along with concerns about sovereign debtsustainability, raised potential issues about the resilience of some banking systems.
In China, the authorities had taken measures to contain risks in the financial system. As a result, thepace of growth in debt had slowed to below the pace of growth in the economy. However, given the earlierrapid growth in debt, China's ratio of non-financial debt to GDP remained higher than in othereconomies with comparable income and even higher than in many high-income economies. Members noted thatthe earlier rapid growth in debt had also raised concerns about the lending standards under which thoseloans had been made.
In Australia, conditions in the housing market had remained weak. Housing prices had fallen further inthe capital cities and regional areas. Over the preceding six months, the falls had been largest inSydney and Melbourne, but prices in these cities had remained more than 40 per cent higherthan in 2012. Falls in housing prices had resulted in some borrowers having negative equity, where thevalue of their loans exceeded that of their properties. Nationally, just over 2 per cent ofborrowers, accounting for less than 3 per cent of housing debt, were estimated to havenegative equity. Around 90 per cent of these borrowers were in Queensland, Western Australiaand the Northern Territory. Members observed that negative equity by itself was not a concern forfinancial stability. However, if unemployment were to rise and borrowers were not able to continue tomake repayments, then financial institutions would incur increased losses. Members noted that thedecline in high loan-to-valuation ratio (LVR) lending in recent years was expected to lessen any lossesfor lenders. In recent quarters, almost all loans to investors had LVRs less than 90 per cent.By contrast, a decade earlier only 85 per cent of loans to investors had LVRs less than90 per cent. The share of owner-occupiers with high LVR loans had also declined.
Members noted that total household payments on housing debt as a share of income had been broadlystable in recent years. Within the total, however, an increase in scheduled principal repayments hadroughly offset a fall in unscheduled principal repayments. Members noted that households' excesspayments amounted to about two-and-a-half years' worth of scheduled repayments on average.Housing loan interest payments had increased slightly as housing debt had increased.
Banks' assets had continued to perform well overall. Although banks' non-performinghousing loans had increased, they remained low at less than 1 per cent of their total housinglending. Members noted that the increase in housing loan arrears had been driven by loans remaining inarrears for longer, on average. Banks' business loans had been performing well, withnon-performing loan rates around their lowest levels in a decade. Banks had continued to accumulatecapital, with the capital ratios of the four major banks all exceeding or close to the‘unquestionably strong’ benchmarks set out by the Australian Prudential RegulationAuthority (APRA).
The tightening in banks' housing lending practices over recent years had been accompanied by anincrease in lending by non-banks, although this was still estimated to account for less than5 per cent of total housing credit. Members noted that, while not subject to prudentialregulation by APRA, non-banks' housing lending is subject to responsible lending obligations. Theavailable evidence suggested that the riskiness of non-bank housing lending had not increased.
Members noted that the International Monetary Fund's Financial Sector Assessment Program reporton the Australian financial system was generally positive about the resilience of domestic financialinstitutions and the quality of regulatory and supervisory oversight, but made several high-levelrecommendations for improving current arrangements.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members observed that growth in the global economy hadslowed over the second half of 2018 and into 2019. Trade tensions and political developments in Europeremained sources of uncertainty. At the same time, though, global financial conditions had eased inpreceding months and, in China, the authorities had provided targeted stimulus to support domesticgrowth. In a number of economies, continued strength in labour market data and moderating GDP growthwere sending different signals about the momentum in economic activity. Members noted that this was alsothe case in Australia. While the labour market had continued to improve in early 2019, GDP growth hadslowed over 2018. Continued low growth in household disposable income and the adjustment in housingmarkets had weighed on household spending.
Members noted that the sustained low level of interest rates over recent years had been supportingeconomic activity and had contributed to progress in reducing the unemployment rate and returninginflation towards the midpoint of the target, albeit only gradually. The central scenario was forfurther gradual progress to be made on both unemployment and inflation. Members observed that a pick-upin growth in household disposable income was an important element of these forecasts. Given this outlookfor further progress towards the Bank's goals, members agreed that there was not a strong casefor a near-term adjustment in monetary policy. Members recognised that it was not possible to fine-tuneoutcomes and that holding monetary policy steady would enable the Bank to be a source of stability andconfidence.
Members agreed that inflation was likely to remain low for some time. Wages growth had remained low, there continued to be strong competition in the retail sector and governments had been working to easecost of living pressures, including through their influence on administered prices. In thesecircumstances, members agreed that the likelihood of a scenario where the cash rate would need to beincreased in the near term was low.
Members also discussed the scenario where inflation did not move any higher and unemployment trendedup, noting that a decrease in the cash rate would likely be appropriate in these circumstances. Theyrecognised that the effect on the economy of lower interest rates could be expected to be smaller thanin the past, given the high level of household debt and the adjustment that was occurring in housingmarkets. Nevertheless, a lower level of interest rates could still be expected to support the economythrough a depreciation of the exchange rate and by reducing required interest payments on borrowing, freeing up cash for other expenditure.
Taking account of the further progress expected towards the Bank's goals, members assessed thatit was appropriate to hold the cash rate steady. Looking forward, the Board will continue to monitordevelopments, including how the current tensions between the domestic GDP and labour market data evolve, and set monetary policy to support sustainable growth in the economy and achieve the inflation targetover time.
The Decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 1.5 per cent.