Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 2 February 2021
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment), Carl Schwartz (Deputy Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the outlookfor the global economy had improved following the successful development and early stage rollout ofCOVID-19 vaccines. Fiscal and monetary policy settings remained highlyexpansionary and in some economies additional fiscal stimulus was in prospect. Growth forecasts for theglobal economy and Australia's major trading partners had been revised a little higher as aresult. However, the brighter outlook did not change members' assessment that the global recoverywas still likely to be bumpy and uneven, with most economies expected to be well short of theirpre-pandemic trajectories at the end of the forecast period. Labour markets were therefore likely tohave considerable spare capacity for some time, resulting in subdued inflationary pressures. The spreadof the virus and the speed of vaccine distribution remained key determinants of the outlook.
Members noted that the global recovery had lost some momentum around the turn of the year asrestrictions on mobility in some economies were tightened following a resurgence of COVID-19 infections. This continued a pattern observed in the preceding year ofhighly variable growth outcomes across economies. China and some other economies in east Asia hadexperienced relatively strong recoveries, with GDP in the current year likely to be tracking at levelsexpected before the pandemic. Favourable health outcomes and a surge in manufactured goods exports hadcontributed to this. Many economies were expected to have recovered their pre-pandemic levels of GDP bythe end of the year, but still be short of levels expected prior to the onset of the pandemic. In asmaller number of economies, including some in Europe that had experienced severe health outcomes, GDPwas expected to still be below pre-pandemic levels at the end of 2021.
Members noted that the strength of the global demand for goods, the faster-than-expected recovery inglobal economic activity and the improved outlook had contributed to a strong rebound in commodity andother key input prices. Oil prices had recovered much of their decline early in the pandemic, whilebase metals prices were above pre-pandemic levels. Iron ore prices had also risen further in recentmonths, to trade at their highest levels in many years. High iron ore prices had been supported byongoing supply disruptions in Brazil and strong demand from Chinese steel producers. The highercommodity prices had supported a marked rise in Australia's terms of trade, which was expected toreach its highest level in nearly a decade in the March quarter. Members also noted that otherimportant global input prices, such as those for semiconductors, had risen above levels prevailingbefore the pandemic, reflecting strong global demand for electronics and other goods that usesemiconductors as inputs.
Members noted that several vaccines had already been approved for use internationally, and that morewere likely to be available in the near future. Some countries, including those with well-functioningpublic health systems and ample initial vaccine supplies, had been able to meet or exceed their earlytargets for the rollout of their vaccine programs, while other countries had fallen short of theirtargets. Distributing and administering vaccines on such a large scale and under intense time pressurewas presenting significant logistical and administrative challenges for many countries.
In concluding their discussion of the international economy, members discussed the significant fiscalresponses to the pandemic. Additional fiscal support had been announced in a number of economies thatwere affected by second or third waves of infections. The wide variation in public debt levels prior tothe pandemic, and in health outcomes over the preceding year, helped to explain some of thecross-country differences in fiscal responses.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that the recovery in the second half of 2020 had beenfaster than initially expected, in line with the pattern observed internationally. Favourable healthoutcomes in Australia had enabled the lifting of restrictions and boosted activity. Consumption hadrebounded quickly as health-related restrictions on activity had been eased, suggesting thatsupply-side constraints were key to driving the spending patterns observed during the pandemic;households had also adapted their consumption habits. Business investment had fallen, but by less thanexpected. More broadly, the rapid bounce-back in domestic activity had also been supported byadditional fiscal measures announced by the Australian and state governments in the latter part of2020. This had enabled a faster recovery in labour market conditions than expected a few monthsearlier, with the unemployment rate in the December quarter declining more quickly than even the upsidescenario presented in the November 2020 Statement on Monetary Policy.
In discussing the outlook for activity and the labour market, members noted that the forecasts underthe baseline scenario had been upgraded relative to 3 months earlier. This upward revisionincorporated the stronger starting point for the forecasts and improved outlook. GDP and employment werenow expected to reach their pre-pandemic levels over the course of 2021, around 6–12 monthsearlier than previously expected.
Members noted that the lowest rate of population growth since the First World War would continue tohave a significant bearing on the outlook. The level of GDP was not expected to return to its previoustrajectory over the forecast period, largely because population growth would be so much lower thanassumed prior to the pandemic. Lower population growth would continue to weigh on both aggregate demandand labour supply in the period ahead, although the effects on labour supply and wages would be partlylimited by foreign students tending to have a lower participation rate than the domestic working-agepopulation. Low population growth, reflecting reduced net overseas migration in particular, was alsoexpected to affect high-density residential investment for some time to come. Members noted that overalldwelling investment would have been lower had the HomeBuilder program and other state governmentincentives been less effective in stimulating activity in the detached housing sector.
In their discussion of the labour market, members observed that, in contrast to expectations3 months earlier, the peak in the unemployment rate had probably already occurred. Notwithstandinga swift rebound in the participation rate, the firmer outlook for employment had resulted in a lowerexpected unemployment rate profile across the forecast period. Despite the end of the JobKeeper programin March creating some uncertainty for near-term labour market outcomes, the unemployment rate wasexpected to resume trending lower in the second half of the year. In the baseline scenario, theunemployment rate was expected to decline to around 6 per cent by the end of 2021, beforereaching around 5¼ per cent by mid 2023. While the strong recovery and improvedoutlook for employment had reduced the prospects for substantial scarring effects in the labour market, the forecasts implied that there would still be spare capacity in the labour market at the end of theforecast period.
Members commenced their discussion of the household sector by noting that the rebound in consumption inthe second half of 2020 had been supported by very strong growth in disposable income over the year. Astemporary income support measures tapered or ceased, household income was expected to decline through tothe middle of 2021, before resuming steady growth in line with recovery in the labour market. In thebaseline scenario, consumption growth was expected to remain positive but moderate in the period ahead;in per capita terms, the level of consumption had rebounded strongly and, by 2022, was forecast to havereturned to levels expected prior to the pandemic. The outlook for consumption was supported by manyhouseholds strengthening their balance sheet and liquidity positions during the pandemic. Restrictionson consumption, precautionary behaviour and strong growth in incomes had contributed to householdsadding considerably to savings during the June and September quarters of 2020. Members noted thesignificant uncertainty around whether and how quickly the savings ratio would return to more typicallevels, and how households would use the additional savings accumulated during 2020.
Members observed that conditions in the housing market had been more resilient than expected, which hadassisted the economic recovery. Housing prices had recently been rising across most of Australiafollowing an earlier period where conditions had been quite variable. This had returned the nationalhousing price index to levels reached around 4 years earlier. Housing price increases had beenlarger in regional Australia than in the capital cities; price levels in some smaller capital cities hadincreased to new highs. Members noted that there were few signs of a deterioration in lending standards;however, lending standards would be monitored closely in the period ahead.
In their discussion of the outlook for wages growth and inflation, members noted that the forecastsunder the baseline scenario had increased a little relative to 3 months earlier, in line with thelower expected unemployment rate. However, both wages growth and underlying inflation were expected toremain below 2 per cent over the forecast period, reflecting ongoing spare capacity in theeconomy.
Members observed that wages growth had been subdued for a number of years and had recently declinedfurther, to the lowest levels in at least 2 decades. Firms had responded quickly in the earlystages of the pandemic by delaying wage increases, imposing wage freezes and, in some cases, applyingtemporary wage cuts. Liaison contacts had suggested it could be some time before wage freezes werelifted. The improved outlook for activity and employment was expected to lift private sector wagesgrowth a little over the forecast period. However, this was partly offset by the downward revision tothe outlook for public sector wages growth, as some state governments had announced measures to capwages growth at rates below those seen in recent years.
Turning to the outlook for inflation, members noted that underlying inflation pressures were subduedand expected to remain so in the period ahead. Although the outlook for underlying inflation had beenrevised up a little relative to 3 months earlier, ongoing spare capacity and low wages growth wereexpected to keep underlying inflation below 2 per cent over the forecast period. Membersrecalled the domestic and international experience prior to the pandemic, which suggested that asustained period of labour market tightness would be needed to generate the faster wages growth requiredto see inflation return to the 2 to 3 per cent target range. Headline year-endedinflation was expected to increase temporarily to around 3 per cent in the June quarter 2021, largely reflecting swings in the prices of child care, automotive fuel and some other administeredprices. It was then forecast to fall back below 2 per cent by the end of the year and staybelow 2 per cent over the remainder of the forecast period.
Given the high degree of uncertainty around the outlook, members considered 2 plausiblealternative scenarios around the baseline forecast. In the baseline forecast, no further significantoutbreaks of the virus were assumed to occur in Australia, although there could be some smalleroutbreaks on the scale seen in recent months. Restrictions on domestic activity were assumed to be easedover the course of the year. Australia's international borders were assumed to remain closed untilat least the end of the year.
A downside scenario was considered by members, where further large outbreaks of the virus required thereimposition of restrictions on activity, although not the extended lockdowns contemplated in previousdownside scenarios. Weaker activity would see the unemployment rate remain around6¾ per cent for most of 2021 and then decline only gradually thereafter. The largerdegree of spare capacity in the labour market would be expected to place further downward pressure onwages growth and keep inflation trending lower until mid 2022.
A plausible upside scenario was also discussed by members, which assumed that a run of positive healthoutcomes domestically and abroad enabled a faster easing of restrictions on activity. This would boosthousehold and business confidence and, with it, private spending and investment. The stronger profilefor activity in this scenario would lead to a faster decline in the unemployment rate, which would fallto below 5 per cent by the end of 2022. Inflation would also rise a little faster in thisscenario, but even still it would approach 2 per cent only by the end of the forecastperiod.
International financial markets
Members noted that global financial market conditions had remained very accommodative and monetarystimulus was expected to remain in place for some time. In the advanced economies, several centralbanks, including the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan and Sweden'sRiksbank, had recently indicated that they would increase the size and/or extend the timeframe of theirasset purchase programs. A number of central banks had also introduced lending facilities or enhancedexisting facilities to support the flow of credit to the real economy. Members observed that the size ofthe Bank's balance sheet relative to GDP remained lower than that of most other advanced economycentral banks.
Long-term government bond yields had increased over the preceding couple of months in most advancedeconomies, reflecting the upgraded growth outlook related to the rollout of the COVID-19 vaccines and expected fiscal stimulus measures, notably in the UnitedStates. Much of the increase in bond yields had reflected an increase in the compensation for inflationsought by investors. Members observed that government borrowing costs had remained low across advancedeconomies and issuance had continued to be met by strong demand.
Corporate funding conditions had also remained highly accommodative and borrowing costs had remainedaround record lows. Investor confidence had been buoyed by the rollout of vaccines, new fiscal stimulusmeasures and sustained monetary stimulus, despite the challenges of rising COVID-19 cases in some countries. Credit spreads had narrowed further and equityprices had increased. US equity prices had increased by more than in many other countries, partlyreflecting the higher share of technology-related stocks in US equity indices.
The US dollar had depreciated further in response to the improvement in the medium-term globalgrowth outlook. Commodity prices had also increased against this backdrop and the Australian dollar hadappreciated back to around 2018 levels in trade-weighted terms. Members observed that, nonetheless, theadditional monetary policy stimulus as a result of the Bank's package of policy measures announcedin November 2020 had contributed to the Australian dollar being noticeably lower than it would have beenotherwise.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, the Bank's package of policy measures announced in November 2020 had led to afurther easing of financial conditions. The cash rate had declined to 3 basis points and othershort-term money market rates had also declined to be close to zero.The 3-year Australian Government bond yield had been at the target of around 10 basis points, supported by bond purchases on several occasions in mid November and early December. The Bank washalfway through the $100 billion bond purchase program. While longer-dated Australian Governmentbond yields had increased since early December, this largely reflected international developments andthe yield differential to US Treasuries had been broadly stable over that period. Staff estimatessuggested that longer-term Australian Government bond yields were around 30 basis points lowerthan otherwise as a result of the bond purchase program. Members noted that government bond markets inAustralia continued to function smoothly for both Australian Government bonds and semis.After drawing down the bulk of initial Term Funding Facility (TFF) allowances by the end-Septemberdeadline, banks had since drawn down only a small share of their additional and supplementary TFFallowances. Similar to the initial allowance period, further TFF drawings were expected to pick uptowards the end of the remaining drawdown period, which would finish in June 2021.Reductions in money market rates and retail deposit rates had further reduced banks' fundingcosts. Borrowing rates for households and businesses had also declined to new lows. Reductions inborrowing rates since November had mostly been for fixed-rate home loans and for business loans underthe government's small and medium-sized enterprises loan guarantee scheme. The average rate paidon outstanding variable-rate housing loans had continued to drift gradually lower, reflecting ongoingcompetition for new high-quality borrowers and the effect of borrowers refinancing their loans.Funding conditions for Australian non-financial firms had remained highly accommodative. Creditspreads had narrowed further and Australian firms had been able to increase the tenor of their bondissuance in 2020. Equity prices had increased a little further since early December. While the ASX200 had risen noticeably since March 2020 – with a significant contribution from resourcecompanies reflecting higher commodity prices – it had remained around 5 per cent belowits peak early in 2020.Demand for housing finance had continued to pick up over preceding months, especially fromowner-occupiers. New housing loan commitments for owner-occupiers had increased to be well above theprevious high in 2017. Investor housing loan commitments had also increased somewhat, but remained wellbelow earlier peaks. Members noted that demand for new business loans had remained subdued, includingfor small and medium-sized enterprises.Considerations for monetary policyIn considering the policy decision, members observed that the outlook for the global economy hadimproved over prior months owing to the development of vaccines. At the same time, the global recoveryhad lost some momentum around the turn of the year, as COVID-19 cases hadsurged again in many countries. The global outlook remained dependent on the path of the pandemic and onsignificant fiscal and monetary support. The recovery was likely to remain bumpy and uneven, and mosteconomies were expected to be well below their pre-pandemic trajectories for the level of output forsome time. Inflation remained low and below central bank targets in many economies.In Australia, the economic recovery was well under way and had been stronger than expected previously.There had been strong growth in employment and a welcome decline in the unemployment rate. Theseoutcomes had been underpinned by Australia's success on the health front and the very significantfiscal and monetary support. An important near-term issue was how households and businesses would adjustto the tapering of some fiscal support measures and to what extent they would use their stronger balancesheets to support spending. Members agreed that, while the recovery was expected to continue, the levelof output remained noticeably below its pre-pandemic trajectory. The high unemployment rate andconsiderable spare capacity were expected to result in subdued wages growth and inflation over comingyears.The Bank's policy actions to date had been working broadly as expected. Together, the bondpurchases, the TFF and the targets for the 3-year bond yield and the cash rate were helping the economyby lowering financing costs for borrowers, contributing to a lower exchange rate than otherwise, supporting the supply of credit and supporting housing and business balance sheets. Since the start of2020, the Bank's balance sheet had increased by around $160 billion and a further substantialincrease was in prospect. The Bank had bought a cumulative $52 billion of government bonds issuedby the Australian Government and the states and territories under the bond purchase program. The Bankhad not purchased bonds in support of the 3-year yield target since early December 2020. Authoriseddeposit-taking institutions had drawn down $86 billion of low-cost funding through the TFF and hadaccess to a further $99 billion under the facility. Members noted that the Australian bankingsystem, with its strong capital and liquidity buffers, had remained resilient and was helping to supportthe economic recovery.The Board remained committed to doing what it reasonably could to support the Australian economy, anddecided to maintain the existing policy settings. Members concluded that very significant monetarysupport would be required for some time, as it would be some years before the Bank's goals forinflation and unemployment were achieved. Given this, it would be premature to consider withdrawingmonetary stimulus.Members discussed the bond purchase program, which was scheduled to be completed in mid April 2021.They considered 3 factors: the effectiveness of the bond purchases; the decisions of other centralbanks; and, most importantly, the outlook for inflation and employment. The Board assessed that the bondpurchase program had helped to lower interest rates and had contributed to a lower exchange rate thanotherwise. Australia's government bond markets continued to function well and further purchaseswere not expected to be a source of market dysfunction.A number of central banks in other advanced economies had announced extensions of their bond purchaseprograms to at least the end of 2021, and there was a widespread expectation among market participantsthat the Bank's program would be extended in some way. Given this, if the Bank were to cease bondpurchases in April, it was likely that there would be unwelcome significant upward pressure on theexchange rate. Members discussed the outlook for the economy and concluded that it would be some yearsbefore the goals for inflation and unemployment were achieved. In view of these considerations, and thefact that the cash rate was at its effective lower bound, the Board resolved to purchase an additional$100 billion of bonds issued by the Australian Government and states and territories following thecompletion of the existing bond purchase program in mid April. These additional purchases would be atthe same rate of $5 billion per week, allocated on the same basis, namely around80 per cent Australian Government Securities and around 20 per cent bonds issued bythe states and territories. The decision to extend the bond purchase program would ensure a continuationof the Bank's monetary support for the Australian economy.Members reviewed the operation of the TFF and agreed that it had worked as intended by reducingborrowing costs and supporting the flow of credit, including for small and medium-sized enterprises. TheBoard decided to maintain the existing terms of the facility. Banks will be able to draw on the facilityuntil the end of June 2021, and continue to benefit from this low-cost funding through to mid 2024.The Board would consider extending the facility if there were a marked deterioration in funding andcredit conditions in the Australian financial system. However, there had not been signs of such adeterioration recently.Members also discussed the operation of the target for the 3-year Australian Government bond yield.This target had been effective in lowering short-term interest rates, which matter most for privateborrowing and lending decisions. The target had also helped to anchor the Australian yield curve, andreinforced the Bank's forward guidance regarding the cash rate. The Board determined that the3-year yield target would be maintained. Later in the year, the Board would need to consider whether toshift the focus of the yield target from the April 2024 bond to the November 2024 bond. In consideringthis issue, members would give close attention to the flow of economic data and the outlook forinflation and employment.Members also discussed the effect that low interest rates have on financial and macroeconomicstability. They acknowledged the risks inherent in investors searching for yield in a low interest rateenvironment, including risks linked to higher leverage and asset prices, particularly in the housingmarket. The Board concluded that there were greater benefits for financial stability from a strongereconomy, while acknowledging the importance of closely monitoring risks in asset markets.Members affirmed that the cash rate would be maintained at 10 basis points for as long asnecessary. They continued to view a negative policy rate as extraordinarily unlikely. The Board will notincrease the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per centtarget range. For this to occur, wages growth will have to be materially higher than it is currently.This will require significant gains in employment and a return to a tight labour market. The Board doesnot expect these conditions to be met until 2024 at the earliest.The decisionThe Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:a target for the cash rate of 0.1 per centan interest rate of zero on Exchange Settlement balances held by financial institutions at theBanka target of around 0.1 per cent for the yield on the 3-year Australian Governmentbondthe expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small andmedium-sized businesses, with an interest rate on new drawings of 0.1 per centthe purchase of $100 billion of government bonds of maturities of around 5 to 10 yearsat a rate of $5 billion per week following the Board meeting on 3 November 2020.The Board agreed to purchase an additional $100 billion of government bonds when the existing bondpurchase program is completed in mid April 2021. These additional purchases will be at the same rate of$5 billion per week.