Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Darwin – 2 July 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion by noting that growth in the global economy had remained moderateover preceding months. Global trade and manufacturing activity had slowed over the preceding year. Tradetensions had remained elevated, although no new measures had been introduced since the previousmeeting.
In China, recent indicators of economic activity suggested that growth had slowed since the Marchquarter. Growth in industrial production had fallen following a strong reading in March and the level offixed asset investment had declined. Conditions in the Chinese property market had also softened andunderlying demand conditions were expected to moderate over time, given the ageing of the population anda slowing in the rate of urbanisation. Over the preceding month, the Chinese authorities had introducedadditional measures to support growth, including more favourable financing conditions for localgovernments investing in infrastructure projects.
In east Asia, the combination of weaker Chinese growth, the downturn in global semiconductor demand andthe trade and technology disputes had weighed on trade, although new export orders suggested thatconditions might be stabilising. The effect of the US–China trade dispute had not been evenacross the region. Some economies, such as Thailand and Vietnam, had seen strong growth in their exportsto the United States, which reflected some diversion of trade that had previously been between theUnited States and China.
Growth in output in the United States had continued to be supported by strong growth in consumption, while growth in investment appeared to have slowed further. Members noted that capital goods orders hadslowed and that the stimulus to investment from tax cuts had largely run its course. Growth in domesticdemand in the euro area had been relatively resilient in the March quarter, but more recent data hadbeen mixed. Growth in Japanese domestic demand had slowed in early 2019, partly as a result ofspillovers from weak external demand conditions, but growth was likely to be supported in the near termby a pick-up in consumption growth in the lead-up to an increase in the consumption tax in October2019.
Labour markets remained tight in the major advanced economies. Members noted that participation ratesfor people aged between 15 and 64 years had increased significantly in recent years and unemploymentrates were at historically low levels. This suggested that there was relatively little spare capacity inthese labour markets. Members noted that participation rates of people aged 65 years and over had alsobeen increasing. Wages growth had picked up, but this had not yet been translated into strongerinflationary pressures and inflation remained below target in most advanced economies. Althoughinflation had been around target in the United States, some measures suggested US inflation had shiftedlower more recently. The decline in oil prices, by around 15 per cent since their peak in midMay, would weigh on headline inflation globally in the near term.
Iron ore prices had increased by more than 25 per cent since the previous meeting and hadmore than doubled over the previous year. Chinese steel production had continued to grow strongly inrecent months, despite slowing industrial activity in China. At the same time, there was limited sparecapacity in the seaborne market to increase supply and inventories of iron ore at Chinese ports had beendeclining. Rising iron ore prices had underpinned a 3 per cent increase in the Australianterms of trade in the March quarter.
Domestic Economic Conditions
Members noted that the main domestic economic news over the previous month had been the release of thenational accounts for the March quarter and updates on the labour and housing markets.
The national accounts reported that the domestic economy had grown by 0.4 per cent in theMarch quarter. Public demand had continued to support growth in the quarter, with public consumptionboosted by the rollout of the National Disability Insurance Scheme and increased spending on thePharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. Growth in public sector investment had been positive despite a declinein defence spending. Members noted that there was a strong pipeline of public infrastructure projectsthat could support activity for some time.
Private demand had contracted for the third consecutive quarter because there had been further falls inmining investment and housing construction. Consumption growth had remained subdued.
Growth in business investment had been weaker than expected in the March quarter. This was partlybecause it had taken longer than expected for liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects to reach finalcompletion. However, investment in automation and other productive efficiencies had supported machinery& equipment investment in the mining sector. Non-mining business investment had continued to expandin the March quarter, supported by a further increase in non-residential construction, while non-miningmachinery & equipment investment had fallen. Members observed that there had been some differencesin the findings of surveys of business conditions. In the main, surveyed measures of business conditionshad declined to around or a little above average levels. However, both the retail and transportationsectors had experienced well below-average conditions.
Exports had increased in the March quarter, primarily driven by growth in rural and service exports.The boost to meat exports in the quarter as a result of ongoing drought conditions leading to destockinghad been larger than the subtraction from lower crop exports. Resource exports (excluding non-monetarygold) had fallen in the March quarter because of temporary supply disruptions. More recent data on tradeand shipments suggested that iron ore and LNG exports had increased since the March quarter, while coalexports appeared to have fallen. Higher iron ore prices had supported overall export values and thetrade surplus had increased to almost 3 per cent of GDP in the March quarter. The tradesurplus was at its highest level, and the current account deficit at its lowest level, measured as ashare of GDP, since the 1970s.
Consumption had grown by 1.8 per cent over the year to the March quarter, which was wellbelow average. Members noted that, in per capita terms, consumption had been broadly flat. Growth inhousehold spending on essential items had been relatively steady, while the level of spending ondiscretionary items had fallen in the March quarter. This weakness had been broadly based across thestates and recent retail trade data suggested that discretionary spending had remained soft in the Junequarter.
Members had a detailed discussion of the effects on price inflation in the retail trade sector ofincreased competition from foreign entrants and online retailers over the preceding decade or so.Members noted that the increase in the supply of retail items and lower retail prices in response toincreased competition were positive developments for consumers, other things equal. Many retailers andwholesalers had also become more efficient in response to more intense competition, often using newtechnology (including in logistics), which had resulted in relatively rapid multifactor productivitygrowth in these sectors. Members noted that the adjustment in the retail sector had been protracted andhad put downward pressure on inflation for some years. In the more recent period, the effects on pricesof greater competition had been difficult to separate from the effects of the prevailing weak demandconditions.
Growth in household disposable income had increased in recent quarters, supported by growth in labourincome, but had remained low in year-ended terms. Members noted that growth in labour income had beendriven by strong employment growth and that growth in hourly earnings had remained subdued. New privatesector enterprise bargaining agreements had incorporated slightly faster wages growth than agreementsreached a year earlier. However, wages growth for workers on existing enterprise bargaining agreementshad remained subdued, and there was little prospect of a near-term pick-up in public sector outcomesgiven the ongoing wage caps.
A small decline in growth in tax payments had also contributed to growth in household disposable incomein the March quarter. By contrast, the income of unincorporated enterprises had remained weak, partlybecause of drought-related falls in farm incomes and the downturn in housing construction. Members notedthat this weakness was likely to continue in the near term.
Dwelling investment had declined in the March quarter. Further falls were expected given the sharpdecline in building approvals over the preceding year and a half. While the pipeline of constructionwork yet to be done in New South Wales and Victoria remained high, liaison contacts expected housingconstruction could drop off more sharply because pre-sales activity had been so weak.
Conditions in the established housing markets of Sydney and Melbourne had improved a little since theprevious meeting. Housing prices had stabilised in June in these cities and auction clearance rates hadpicked up further, albeit still on low volumes. More generally, turnover in the housing market hadremained low. Housing prices had continued to fall in Perth and Darwin.
Employment growth had remained strong, at 2.9 per cent over the year to May. Despite this, there was still spare capacity in the labour market. Some of the additional labour demand had been metby an increase in the participation rate, which had reached its highest level on record. Even so, forward-looking indicators, such as job advertisements and employment intentions, suggested that growthin employment would moderate over coming months. The unemployment rate had remained at5.2 per cent in May and the underemployment rate had remained elevated.
In view of the fact the meeting was held in Darwin, members had a thorough discussion of economicconditions and future economic opportunities in the Northern Territory. They noted that the NorthernTerritory economy had experienced a significant cycle related to the construction and then completion ofthe INPEX LNG plant. The downturn in the mining cycle had had significant spillovers to other parts ofthe Northern Territory economy because, aside from the public sector, mining and construction are thelargest industries in terms of gross value added. Employment had fallen in the Northern Territory over2019 and this had been accompanied by large flows of people moving to other parts of the country. As aresult, the unemployment rate for the Northern Territory had increased, but it remained lower than thenational average. More generally, the Northern Territory had a relatively young population and highlabour market participation rates. The decline in the Northern Territory population had also led to asignificant decline in dwelling investment in the Northern Territory over recent years.
Members observed that the broad statistics on the labour market for the Northern Territory masked therelative disadvantage of the Indigenous population. The unemployment rate for Indigenous Australians onaverage was relatively high, and Indigenous Australians were less likely to complete school and morelikely to experience poor health. These measures of Indigenous disadvantage were particularly acute inremote locations, where it is more difficult to deliver services.
Members noted that there were a number of opportunities for economic growth in the Northern Territoryin the future, including tourism, agricultural exports (including live beef exports), the defenceindustry and mining. Higher mining investment in the Northern Territory in the future could come fromsome small-scale mining projects that had not yet reached final investment decision and the possibilityof some onshore unconventional gas projects.
Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of financial markets by noting the significant change in theexpected path of monetary policy around the world, particularly in the United States. This change hadreflected a combination of weaker-than-expected economic activity and inflation over recent months, aswell as the downside risks from the trade and technology disputes between the United States andChina.
Monetary policy in the United States had been unchanged in June, but the Federal Reserve had indicatedthat it was prepared to act to sustain the economic expansion. Members of the Federal Open MarketCommittee (FOMC) saw a stronger case to reduce the federal funds rate during 2019, in contrast with theearlier ‘patient’ stance as the FOMC had awaited further data. Market pricing had moved toimply an expectation that the federal funds rate would decline by 100 basis points over thefollowing year, compared with 50 basis points a month earlier.
In other major economies, the European Central Bank had indicated that it was prepared to add moremonetary stimulus if the outlook for growth and inflation did not improve, including by expanding itsbond-buying program. The Bank of Japan had intimated that it would allow bond yields to move below thelower end of its ‘yield curve control’ target and reiterated that there was scope to easemonetary policy further if needed. And in China, market participants expected the People's Bankof China to ease monetary policy further in the period ahead.
As expectations for monetary policy easing had firmed over the course of this year, governmentbond yields had declined further in major markets, to a record low in Germany and further into negativeterritory in Japan. In the United States, lower bond yields reflected lower expected real policy ratesfor an extended period, as well as persistently low inflation and term premia. Yields on 10-yearAustralian government bonds had reached a historical low of 1.3 per cent, with yieldsremaining around 70 basis points below US treasury bond yields of similar maturity. Compensationfor risk on corporate bonds globally remained compressed, as market participants judged that policyeasing would support growth in economic activity and profits. Members noted that, as a result, the costof funds for corporations remained low, including in Australia.
Equity prices had increased inmajor markets over the preceding month, to a record high level in the United States, despite prominentdownside risks. Higher equity prices owed primarily to a lowering of discount rates, reflecting theexpected easing of monetary policies, whereas the outlook for corporate earnings had been littlechanged. Recent movements in equity prices in Australia had broadly followed international trends, withincreases in equity prices in all main sectors over the preceding month. Members noted thatanalysts' forecasts of earnings of Australian non-resource companies had declined over the courseof the past year, consistent with broader surveys of business conditions.
Members noted thatbank liquidity conditions in China had remained accommodative overall. However, the solvency andliquidity of small banks (which account for one-quarter of banking assets) had been attracting morescrutiny from both investors and the authorities after a period of rapid asset growth, amid widerfinancial stability concerns.
In foreign exchange markets, the US dollar had remainedaround multi-year highs on a trade-weighted basis, although it had depreciated somewhat in the weeksleading up to the meeting as US bond yields had declined relative to those in other major economies. Theeuro had remained within the relatively narrow range of the preceding few years on a trade-weightedbasis, while the yen had broadly appreciated over recent months. The Australian dollar had been largelyunchanged following the decision to lower the cash rate in June. Nevertheless, having depreciated byabout 3 per cent in TWI terms since late 2018, the Australian dollar was around its lows ofrecent years, with the effect of the decline in Australian bond yields relative to other major marketsover that period partly offset by the unexpected strength in commodity prices.
In Australia, monthly housing credit growth had remained broadly stable in recent months, particularly for lending forowner-occupation. Aggregate housing credit had been growing at an annualised rate of around3 per cent, with much of the decline in the rate of growth over the preceding year driven byweaker demand for finance associated with the correction in the housing market. Loan approvals by bothowner-occupiers and investors had continued to decline in May. However, an easing in the loanserviceability interest-rate floor was likely to see a boost in borrowing capacity for many newborrowers, which would be in addition to the positive effect on the cash flow of the household sectoroverall following the reduction in the cash rate at the previous meeting.
The three-month bankbill swap rate (BBSW) had declined further over the preceding month. Accordingly, the increase in thespreads of BBSW and other short-term money market rates to the overnight indexed swap rate in 2018 hadbeen fully unwound. Wholesale funding costs (which affect two-thirds of banks' debt funding) hadalso declined in line with the cash rate. As a result, the major banks' debt funding costs hadreached a historic low.
Members noted that the favourable financing conditions for non-financialcorporations had supported corporate bond issuance. Although business credit growth had declined overrecent months, growth in total business debt had remained little changed. Meanwhile, yields onresidential mortgage-backed securities had also been at low levels and issuance by non-banks in thismarket had increased significantly in the June quarter, to levels not seen since prior to the globalfinancial crisis.
Members noted that most lenders had passed on the 25 basis pointsreduction in the cash rate in June to mortgage rates. Business borrowing rates had declined in line withthe decline in BBSW. Members also noted that the reduction in the cash rate had been passed through tomany retail deposit rates, although some of these rates were already very low.
Market pricingimplied that further monetary policy easing was expected following recent data and the Bank'scommunication since the previous meeting. A 25 basis points reduction in the cash rate had beenfully priced in by August 2019, with a further easing expected by the end of the year.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
Members observed that the outlook for the global economy remained reasonable, although the risks fromthe international trade and technology disputes remained high. Growth in trade had remained weak andthere had been further signs that heightened uncertainty was affecting investment decisions. Despitetight labour markets and rising wages growth, inflation had generally remained low in the advancedeconomies. Both the trade-related downside risks to global growth and ongoing subdued inflation hadspurred an increased expectation that major central banks would ease monetary policy. This hadreinforced already very accommodative conditions in global financial markets.
In considering the policy decision, members discussed the recent data on output and the labour market.On the former, GDP growth had been well below trend over the year to the March quarter. Despite stronggrowth in employment, growth in household disposable income had remained low and this had contributed tolow growth in consumption. Members noted the near-term prospects for a lift in income growth and thecontribution of the low and middle income tax offset. Higher growth in disposable income was expected tosupport consumption, although the outlook for consumption remained uncertain. Accommodative monetarypolicy, strong public demand, a renewed expansion in the resources sector and growth in exports werealso expected to support a return of GDP growth to trend over coming years.
Members observed that employment growth continued to outpace growth in the working-age population.However, most of the strength in labour demand over preceding months had been met by an increase inparticipation, which had risen to a record high level, rather than a decline in the unemployment rate.Although there had been a modest pick-up in wages growth in the private sector, wages growth hadremained low overall. In combination, these factors suggested that spare capacity was likely to remainin the labour market for some time.
Declining housing prices had also contributed to low growth in consumption, although there were signsthat conditions in some housing markets, notably in Sydney and Melbourne, had stabilised. Members notedthat mortgage rates were at record lows and that there was strong competition for borrowers of highcredit quality. However, demand for credit by investors continued to be subdued and credit conditionsfor small and medium-sized businesses remained tight.
In assessing the outlook for inflation, members agreed that further improvements in the labour marketwould be required for wages growth to increase materially. As assessed at the previous meeting, membersagreed that the Australian economy could sustain a lower rate of unemployment, while achieving inflationconsistent with the target. In light of this, the recent run of data and the lower level of interestrates resulting from the decision taken at the previous meeting, the case for a further reduction in thecash rate was considered.
Members recognised that, in the current environment, the main channels through which lower interestrates would support the economy were a lower value of the exchange rate than otherwise would be the caseand lower required interest payments on borrowing, which would free up cash for other expenditure byhouseholds and businesses.
Members judged that a further reduction in the level of interest rates would support the necessarygrowth in employment and incomes, and promote stronger overall economic conditions, which would in turnsupport a gradual increase in underlying inflation. Members also judged that the extent of sparecapacity in the economy, and the likely pace at which it would be absorbed, meant that a decline ininterest rates was unlikely to encourage an unwelcome material pick-up in borrowing by households thatwould add to medium-term risks in the economy. Members recognised the uneven effect of lower interestrates on different households.
Taking into account all the available information, the Board decided that it was appropriate to lowerthe cash rate by 25 basis points. This decision, together with the reduction in the cash ratedecided at the previous meeting, would assist in reducing spare capacity in the economy and makingfaster progress in reducing the unemployment rate. Lower interest rates would provide more Australianswith jobs and assist with achieving more assured progress towards the inflation target. The Board wouldcontinue to monitor developments in the labour market closely and adjust monetary policy if needed tosupport sustainable growth in the economy and the achievement of the inflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to lower the cash rate by 25 basis points to 1.00 per cent.