Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 2 March 2021
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), David Jacobs (Deputy Head, International Markets and Relations, International Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by reviewing the cross-countryexperience with COVID-19 vaccine rollouts. Israel's progress inadministering vaccines was the most advanced, with a small number of countries, including the UnitedKingdom and the United States, likely to achieve widespread inoculation during the June quarter. Others, including Australia, Japan and countries of the European Union, were likely to achieve high levels ofinoculation a little later in the year. However, many emerging market economies were unlikely to havesufficient access to vaccine supplies to achieve widespread inoculation for around a year or more.
Members noted that the global economy was set to regain momentum over coming months, after a slowdownaround the turn of the year induced by a resurgence in coronavirus infections in some countries. Thatsaid, the restrictions on activity reintroduced late in 2020 had resulted in less severe effects thanthose imposed in response to the pandemic earlier in 2020. With widespread inoculation likely to beachieved in a number of advanced economies in coming months and substantial further fiscal support inthe United States in prospect, downside risks to the global growth outlook had receded. Members agreedthat the prospects for a sustained global economic recovery were better than a few months earlier, although the path ahead was likely to remain bumpy and uneven.
Members noted that the rebound in the demand for goods globally and the upturn in industrialproduction, particularly in China and elsewhere in east Asia, had continued to support commodity prices.Iron ore prices remained at high levels and the prices of many other commodities, including oil, coaland base metals, had increased strongly in recent months. The rebound in energy prices had beensupported by cold weather in the northern hemisphere and the strong recovery in industrial production;base metals prices had also benefited from the rebound in global industrial activity. Other input costs, such as those for shipping, had also risen sharply in preceding months.
Members discussed the role that fiscal stimulus around the world had played in supporting the rise incommodity prices and the more recent increase in inflation expectations. It was considered highly likelythat the US Congress would pass another significant stimulus bill in the near term. As a result, someforecasters were anticipating that inflation pressures could begin to emerge in the United States withinthe following couple of years. In contrast, fiscal settings in some economies were expected to turn lessaccommodative in the second half of 2021.
Members discussed the prospects for recent increases in commodity and other input costs to translateinto a sustained increase in consumer price inflation. This was considered unlikely for as long assubstantial spare capacity remained in labour markets and wages growth remained subdued. Theinternational experience prior to the pandemic had underscored that a sustained period of tightness inlabour markets would be needed in order to generate increases in wages growth, and, even then, wouldput only limited upward pressure on consumer price inflation. Even if wages growth did pick up, it wasalso possible that corporate profit margins in some economies could absorb an increase in labour costsbefore firms passed such costs through to final consumer prices.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that employment had continued to recover to be around½ per cent below its pre-pandemic level. Full-time employment had also continued torecover. Much of the increase in employment in preceding months had been in Victoria following theeasing of pandemic-related restrictions there in the December quarter. Nationally, there had been asharp decline in total and average hours worked in January, which reflected more people than usualtaking annual leave in January following unusually low numbers of people taking leave during 2020.Members welcomed the further decline in the unemployment rate to 6.4 per cent in January. Theparticipation rate had remained high in January and, for most age cohorts, participation rates had beennear or above pre-pandemic levels.
Members noted that the recovery in domestic activity and labour market conditions had continued to besupported by highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. The recovery would be further supportedby the rollout of the domestic vaccination program. However, in the near term there was some uncertaintyrelating to the effect that the end of the JobKeeper program would have on labour market conditions.There was limited international experience to draw on in this regard; New Zealand had been the onlycountry to have wound down its wage subsidy program, and very few people had been reliant on it whenthat program ended. Members also noted that a durable recovery from the pandemic would require a strongand sustained pick-up in business investment.
Members discussed the near-term outlook for the unemployment rate. The end of the JobKeeper program wasseen as unlikely to result in a sustained increase in the unemployment rate. A number of considerationsinformed this assessment. The number of people working zero hours in Australia had declinedsignificantly in recent months to be close to pre-pandemic levels. In addition, some JobKeeperrecipients, including the self-employed, were more likely to suffer a decline in income than loseemployment at the end of the program. Information from liaison contacts had suggested that many firms inreceipt of JobKeeper subsidies had already reduced the size of their workforces and were not planning onanother large round of lay-offs. Against this, it was likely that some jobs that had been maintainedbecause of the wage subsidy provided by JobKeeper would cease when the subsidy ended. Members also tooknote of the increases in forward-looking indicators of labour demand, such as job advertisements andvacancies. These indicators had suggested that the ongoing recovery in labour market conditions could bebroadly sufficient to offset the job losses arising after the end of the JobKeeper program.
Members noted that wages growth had remained low, at 1.4 per cent over the year to theDecember quarter. Some earlier wage cuts had been reversed sooner than expected, which had boosted wagesgrowth in the December quarter, but this was concentrated in a limited number of industries. Strippingout the effects of temporary pay cuts and their subsequent reversal in the December quarter, wagesgrowth remained very subdued. Indeed, wages growth remained around historical lows in many industries, consistent with there being spare capacity across the labour market. The share of firms in theBank's liaison program with wage freezes in place had remained high, and most firms had continuedto report limited upward pressure on wages despite anecdotal reports of labour shortages in smallsegments of the labour market. Public sector wages growth over the year to December was the lowest onrecord, and was unlikely to pick up noticeably given the caps on wages growth in place. Members agreedthat a materially lower unemployment rate would be needed to generate wages growth in excess of3 per cent, which in turn would be required to ensure inflation was sustainably in the2 to 3 per cent target range.
Members discussed the uneven recovery in household spending patterns arising during the pandemic.Expenditure on some goods, such as cars, had increased to a higher level than before the pandemic, catching up from an earlier period of weakness. The consumption of other goods, such as householdequipment, had been very strong early in the pandemic, reflecting substitution from servicesconsumption, but was now easing back towards earlier trends. Other types of consumption, including forsome services that had been especially constrained by the restrictions on activity, had returned toaround or a little below pre-pandemic levels, but were unlikely to expand much further in the near term.Members agreed that careful analysis of the different forms of spending would continue to be required toinform assessments of the sustainability of recent trends.
Members noted that, following the declines in housing prices observed earlier in the pandemic, momentumin the housing market had picked up and price increases had become more broadly based. Price growth andoverall housing conditions had been especially strong in the detached housing sector in outermetropolitan and regional areas. This had partly reflected strong demand from owner-occupiers seekingmore space and from first-home buyers. Advertised rents had also picked up across the country. However, conditions in the apartment rental market in Sydney and particularly in Melbourne had remained subdued, with additional supply still being added to the stock of apartments. Members concurred that housingmarket conditions warranted close monitoring in the period ahead. In particular, it was important thatlending standards remain sound in an environment of rising housing prices and low interest rates.
Alongside lower interest rates, national housing market conditions had been supported by the recoveryin the labour market and fiscal policy measures that had boosted household income and incentives forhousing construction. Residential building approvals for detached housing had been supported by theAustralian Government's HomeBuilder program and other state-based programs, which would boosthousing supply. However, approvals were expected to decline from high levels in the period ahead asthese stimulus programs were wound down. Once these buildings are completed, there could be asignificant decline in construction activity, particularly given very low population growth. Meanwhile, approvals for high-density housing construction had remained weak and there were few signs of a pick-upin the near term.
Members noted that unusual population trends during the pandemic had materially affected nationalhousing market conditions and other parts of the economy, and would continue to do so for some time. Netoverseas migration was expected to be negative into 2022, mostly because of the projected sharp declinein the number of foreign students and other temporary residents. As temporary residents typically livein the larger cities, their absence had especially dampened demand for apartments in Sydney andMelbourne. Members also noted data on domestic migration in Australia showing that the population flowfrom capital cities to regional areas had picked up. Net domestic migration to Melbourne had also turnedsharply negative as fewer people moved there during the pandemic. Members agreed that developments innet overseas and domestic migration would continue to affect conditions in the housing market and theeconomy more broadly for a considerable period.
International financial markets
Members commenced their discussion of global financial markets by considering the factors behind therecent rise in sovereign bond yields. Longer-term yields on advanced-economy bonds had increasedsignificantly over preceding months, including for Australia. This had reflected growing optimism aboutthe economic outlook associated with the rollout of COVID-19 vaccinations, a decline in COVID-19 cases in most economies and upward revisions to theexpected size of US fiscal stimulus measures. The more recent rapid rise in yields had been accompaniedby an increase in the volatility of yields and a decline in bond market liquidity, particularly in theUnited States.
The rise in longer-term government bond yields in advanced economies over preceding months hadpredominantly reflected an increase in compensation for future inflation. Members noted that theincrease in market participants' inflation expectations had been to rates closer to, though nohigher than, central banks' targets, following an earlier period where financial market pricing hadindicated little prospect of inflation targets being met. More recently, there had also been someincrease in real yields in most advanced economies.
Although central banks had not announced any material changes to their asset purchase plans or guidanceon policy rates since the previous meeting, market participants had brought forward their expectationsfor an increase in policy rates in a number of economies, including Australia. In many advancedeconomies, the first increases in policy rates were expected to occur as early as late 2022, accordingto money market interest rates. Members noted that this change appeared to be sooner than implied bymarket participants' own inflation expectations and the forward guidance from central banks thatthey would not increase policy rates until inflation had increased to be sustainably consistent withtargets.
Notwithstanding the rise in sovereign bond yields, global financial conditions had remainedaccommodative. Corporate borrowing costs had remained low and equity prices in advanced economies, including Australia, had increased since the start of the year, despite declines late in February.Equity prices had been supported by better-than-expected earnings results and upward revisions tocorporate earnings forecasts over preceding months, consistent with the more positive economic outlook.At the same time, investment flows to emerging markets had remained strong.
In China, overall funding conditions had remained accommodative. The People's Bank of China hadoverseen a modest tightening in financial conditions in recent weeks, while having emphasised that thisdid not signal a material shift in its policy stance. The Chinese renminbi had appreciated slightlyagainst the US dollar since the start of 2021, and had remained around its highest level since2018.
Members also discussed the broader topic of China's evolving financial system and its globalimportance. China's policy response to the pandemic had placed more emphasis on avoiding a furtherrise in risks in the financial system compared with responses during earlier downturns. The crisis hadalso placed renewed focus on the authorities' long-running efforts to reconfigure the way thefinancial system supported the economy, with some elements having gradually become more market-basedover recent years. Some investors had incurred losses on investments that they had assumed wereguaranteed by the state. Also, there had been more flexibility in interest rates, capital flows and theexchange rate. Notwithstanding an increase in capital inflows, Chinese financial assets had remained asmall share of foreign investors' holdings of foreign assets. Consistent with this, China'smain influence on international markets continued to be through its large trade flows. Members alsodiscussed how China's role in the global financial system might change in the years ahead. Theynoted that this would be affected by factors such as China's balance of savings relative toinvestment, the speed and extent of further easing in constraints on capital flows, and the extent towhich the renminbi gained wider use in international trade and finance.
Domestic financial markets
Domestically, yields on longer-term Australian Government Securities (AGS) had also increasedsignificantly, and the spread between 10-year AGS and US Treasury yields had widened to around25 basis points. Members noted that the decline in liquidity in the AGS market, while noticeable, had not been as significant as that experienced during the period of market dysfunction in March 2020.Yields on shorter-term bonds had remained anchored, although members noted that there had been someupward pressure on Australian 3-year yields late in February. This had required the Bank to purchasebonds in support of the target for the 3-year Australian Government bond yield of around 10 basispoints, which was for the April 2024 bond. At the same time, yields on the November 2024 bond hadincreased along with the increase in longer-term yields. Market participants had brought forward theirexpectations of an increase in the cash rate, which had also been reflected in the higher yield on theNovember 2024 bond.
The Australian dollar had appreciated since November 2020 alongside the significant increase incommodity prices. Members noted that this had followed the earlier depreciation of the Australiandollar, much of which appeared to have reflected anticipation of the Bank's package of policymeasures introduced in November 2020. The Australian dollar was assessed as being lower than it wouldhave been otherwise as a result of the Bank's policies.
The Bank had completed a little over two-thirds of purchases under the initial $100 billion bondpurchase program. Bond purchases under this program had been brought forward in the week leading up tothe meeting to assist with the smooth functioning of the market. The announcement following theFebruary meeting of an additional $100 billion bond purchase program from mid April 2021 had hadlittle lasting effect on yields, which was consistent with this extension already having been reflectedin market pricing.
Domestically, low funding rates had continued to flow through to banks' funding costs. Somebanks had drawn down further 3-year funding under the Term Funding Facility and many had indicated thatthey planned to draw down their allowances prior to the deadline at the end of June 2021. Also, borrowing rates for households and businesses had declined to new lows. Growth in housing credit hadpicked up a little further in January to be 4¼ per cent on a 6-month-annualised basis.Housing loan commitments had been strong, driven by demand from owner-occupiers. Lending to businesseshad been little changed over the preceding few months, after having decreased over much of the secondhalf of 2020.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the outlook for the global economy hadimproved over prior months. While the path ahead was likely to remain bumpy and uneven, there werebetter prospects for a sustained recovery. Global trade had picked up and commodity prices hadincreased over recent months. Nevertheless, the global outlook remained dependent on responses to thepandemic and the risks of further outbreaks of COVID-19 infection, and onthe significant fiscal and monetary support around the world. Inflation remained low and below centralbank targets in many economies.
Financial markets had responded to the positive news on vaccines and the prospect of furthersignificant fiscal stimulus in the United States. Bond yields had increased considerably over February, including in Australia. This increase partly reflected inflation expectations lifting over the mediumterm to be closer to central bank targets. The changes in bond yields globally had been associated withhigher volatility, though with considerably less spillover to other markets than in March and April2020. The Australian dollar had remained at the upper end of the range of recent years.
In Australia, the economic recovery was well under way and had been stronger than expected previously.There had been strong growth in employment and a welcome decline in the unemployment rate to6.4 per cent. The December quarter GDP data were expected to show that the recovery remainedon track. An important near-term issue was how households and businesses would adjust to the tapering ofsome fiscal support measures. Members noted that there may be a temporary pause in the pace ofimprovement in the labour market, as many firms had already adjusted the size of their workforces.
Despite these generally positive developments, members agreed that wage and price pressures had beensubdued and were expected to remain so for several years. The economy had been operating withconsiderable spare capacity and the unemployment rate had remained high. Further progress in reducingspare capacity was expected to occur, but it would take some time before the labour market would betight enough to generate wage increases consistent with achieving the inflation target. There are likelyto be relative price shifts due to changes in the balance of supply and demand during the pandemic, andthe Board would look through these transitory fluctuations in inflation. While annual CPI inflation wasexpected to rise temporarily to 3 per cent around the middle of the year as a result of thereversal of some pandemic-related price reductions, in underlying terms inflation was expected to remainbelow 2 per cent over both 2021 and 2022.
Members discussed the rate of wages growth that would be needed for inflation to be sustainably withinthe 2 to 3 per cent target range. Assuming ongoing labour-productivity growth and abroadly stable profit share of national income, it was likely that wages growth would need to besustainably above 3 per cent, which was well above its current level. The experience of otheradvanced economies over recent years had suggested that it would take a tight labour market andconsiderable time for higher wages growth to be sustained. The Board's judgement was that wagesgrowth would be unlikely to be consistent with the inflation target earlier than 2024.
Since the start of 2020, the Bank's balance sheet had increased by around $175 billion and afurther substantial increase was in prospect. The Bank had recently purchased bonds to support the3-year yield target and would continue to do so as necessary. The Bank was prepared to make furtheradjustments to its purchases in response to market conditions. The Bank had bought a cumulative$74 billion of government bonds issued by the Australian Government and the states and territoriesunder the initial $100 billion bond purchase program. A further $100 billion will be purchasedfollowing the completion of the initial program and the Bank is prepared to do more if that isnecessary. Authorised deposit-taking institutions had drawn down $91 billion of low-cost fundingthrough the Term Funding Facility and had access to a further $94 billion under the facility.Members noted that the Australian banking system, with its strong capital and liquidity buffers, hadremained resilient and was helping to support the economic recovery.
The Bank's monetary policy settings had continued to help the economy by keeping financing costsvery low, contributing to a lower exchange rate than otherwise, supporting the supply of credit tobusinesses and strengthening household and business balance sheets. Monetary and fiscal policy hadsupported the recovery in aggregate demand and the pick-up in employment. The Board remained committedto doing what it reasonably could to support the Australian economy, and would maintain stimulatorymonetary conditions for as long as necessary. Members concluded that very significant monetary supportwould be required for some time, as it would be some years before the Bank's goals for inflationand unemployment were achieved.
Members discussed the operation of the 3-year yield target, to which the Board remained committed.Later in the year, members would need to consider whether to maintain the April 2024 bond as the targetbond or shift the focus of the yield target to the November 2024 bond. The Board agreed that it wouldnot consider removing the target completely or changing the target yield of 10 basis points. If theBoard were to maintain the April 2024 bond as the target bond, rather than move to the next bond, thematurity of the target would gradually decline until the bond finally matured in April 2024. Inconsidering this issue, members would give close attention to the flow of economic data and the outlookfor inflation and employment.
Members also discussed the effect that low interest rates have on financial and macroeconomicstability. They acknowledged the risks inherent in investors searching for yield in a low interest rateenvironment, including risks linked to higher leverage and asset prices, particularly in the housingmarket. Members noted that lending standards remained sound and that it was important that they remainso in an environment of rising housing prices and low interest rates. The Board concluded that therewere greater benefits for financial stability from a stronger economy, while acknowledging theimportance of closely monitoring risks in asset markets.
Members affirmed that the cash rate would be maintained at 10 basis points for as long asnecessary. They continued to view a negative policy rate as extraordinarily unlikely. The Board will notincrease the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per centtarget range. For this to occur, wages growth would need to be materially higher than it is currently.This would require significant gains in employment and a return to a tight labour market. The Board doesnot expect these conditions to be met until 2024 at the earliest.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.1 per centan interest rate of zero on Exchange Settlement balances held by financial institutions at theBanka target of around 0.1 per cent for the yield on the 3-year Australian Governmentbondthe expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small andmedium-sized businesses, with an interest rate on new drawings of 0.1 per centthe purchase of $100 billion of government bonds of maturities of around 5 to 10 yearsat a rate of $5 billion per week following the Board meeting on 3 November 2020the purchase of an additional $100 billion of government bonds when the existing bond purchaseprogram is completed in mid April 2021 at the same rate of $5 billion per week.