Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 2 November 2021
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Tony Richards (Head, Payments Policy Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary)
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the globaleconomy had continued to recover and that conditions were in place for a sustained expansion. The globaloutlook was supported by rising vaccination coverage alongside expansionary fiscal and monetary policysettings. Output in most advanced economies was expected to return to pre-pandemic paths in 2022. Outputhad already recovered to its pre-pandemic trajectory in China, although activity had recently slowed anddevelopments in the property sector had introduced more uncertainty to the outlook. A number of emergingmarket economies were falling short of pre-pandemic expectations for output; in some countries, this wasa result of ongoing health concerns and a more challenging environment for fiscal and monetary policy.
Members noted that capacity constraints in global goods markets had been more persistent than initiallyenvisaged, and price pressures had broadened. The ongoing strength in global goods demand was strainingsupply chains to a degree not evident in the earlier stages of the pandemic. The supply ofsemiconductors, household goods and building materials had struggled to keep pace with the growth indemand; disruptions in globally interconnected supply chains and bottlenecks in transportation networkshad exacerbated the situation. Disruptions in energy markets in the euro area, the United Kingdom andChina had also adversely affected production in some industries, particularly energy-intensive products, including some base metals. Prices for a range of energy and non-energy commodities were at or aroundmulti-year highs. Producer prices had also picked up strongly in a number of countries in recent months.Iron ore prices remained volatile after a large increase and subsequent decline earlier in the year.
Members noted that headline measures of inflation had increased in a number of economies to well abovecentral banks' inflation targets. Higher energy prices, alongside the strong recovery in globaldemand and ongoing capacity constraints in the goods sector, had contributed to this development.Underlying inflation had also picked up, although not to the same extent as headline measures. Centralbanks and other forecasters generally expected most of the factors that had boosted inflation in priormonths to be temporary and for inflation to moderate over the year ahead. Members noted that, while arange of outcomes for global inflation in 2022 were possible, risks to inflation forecasts were tilted tothe upside.
Members noted that wages growth would be key to determining whether the upswing in global inflationpersisted. Labour markets were tightening, with job vacancies high and unemployment rates recovering tobe generally around or only a little above pre-pandemic levels. However, employment and participationrates remained some way below pre-pandemic levels in a number of countries. Labour shortages were beingreported in some industries, including in customer-facing roles, where health concerns among workers anduncertainty over the hours available for work appeared to be lingering. These concerns, alongside vaccinemandates for certain industries and, in some cases, reduced availability of foreign labour and domesticlabour due to early retirements, meant it was uncertain how rapidly labour supply would expand in theperiod ahead. Wages growth had increased more in countries where labour shortages were pronounced, suchas the United States, the United Kingdom and New Zealand. But a consistent pattern in wages growth acrossadvanced economies was not evident. As in Australia, wages growth had been more subdued in Canada and theeuro area, despite strong labour market recoveries in these economies.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that activity in Australia had contracted sharply in theSeptember quarter as a result of the outbreaks of the Delta variant of COVID-19 and associated lockdowns in New South Wales, Victoria and theAustralian Capital Territory. This setback had delayed, but not derailed, the economic recovery that hadbeen under way in the first half of the year. A bounce-back in domestic demand was forecast for theDecember and March quarters as restrictions are eased further. Timely data on mobility, spending andlabour demand pointed to a strong rebound in parts of the country that had been most affected by theDelta outbreak. High rates of vaccination coverage and expansionary policy settings underpinned theoutlook. By mid 2022, activity was expected to be broadly in line with the pre-Delta recovery path.Nevertheless, members agreed that the effects of the pandemic would continue to result in an unevenrecovery across industries and parts of the country. Under the central scenario, GDP was forecast to growby around 3 per cent over 2021, 5½ per cent over 2022 and 2½ per cent over2023.
Members noted that household consumption had declined sharply in the September quarter in response totighter restrictions in some states, but was expected to underpin output growth in subsequent quarters asrestrictions are eased. Consumption of services was expected to lead the recovery, following a period in2020 during which goods consumption had been very strong. Higher household wealth, steady growth inhousehold disposable income and a decline in uncertainty related to health and economic outcomes wereexpected to support household spending over the forecast period. The household saving ratio had increasedsharply in the September quarter, reflecting fewer consumption opportunities and higher income supportpayments, but was expected to decline to around its average level of prior years. In addition to theuncertainties around health outcomes, members agreed that key uncertainties for the consumption outlookrelated to the evolution of asset prices and whether households viewed the savings accumulated during thepandemic as income or wealth, which would determine the rate at which they were run down.
Investment activity, particularly construction, had been adversely affected by lockdowns in the Septemberquarter after a strong first half of the year. However, non-mining business and dwelling investment wereexpected to have regained positive momentum as restrictions were eased in states affected by the Deltaoutbreak. Information from the Bank's liaison program and recent business surveys indicated thatfirms remained positive about the outlook and had generally not scaled back their capital expenditureplans during the lockdowns. Government support payments had assisted some firms during the lockdowns andongoing tax incentives had supported investment by smaller firms.
A large pipeline of work was expected to sustain a high level of residential and non-residentialconstruction activity over the forecast period. Recently, building approvals for detached dwellings aswell as alterations and additions had declined, but from very high levels. A large pipeline of publiccapital works, including road and rail infrastructure, was also expected to support investment activityover the coming year or so. Members noted that capacity constraints in some parts of the constructionsector were being reported, with shortages of materials and labour extending construction times andincreasing building costs. The outlook for mining investment was little changed, as firms had notadjusted capital expenditure plans despite large movements in commodity prices over the recent period.Much of the planned mining investment was aimed at sustaining the level of production rather thanexpanding capacity.
Australia's terms of trade had remained high, as the effect of the recent fall in iron ore prices hadbeen broadly offset by increases in the prices of coal and liquefied natural gas. However, the terms oftrade were expected to decline over the forecast period.
Members noted the rapid growth in housing prices over prior months. Price growth had been strongest fordetached dwellings and in regional areas over the preceding year. Restrictions introduced in response tothe Delta outbreak, including on open inspections, had temporarily weighed on housing market activity, particularly in Melbourne. But new listings and auction market activity had rebounded following theeasing of restrictions. Rental market conditions remained mixed. Advertised rents had increased strongly, including in regional areas, where changes in the pattern of internal migration during the pandemic hadcontributed to demand and supply could not easily respond. It was possible that low listings were alsosupporting advertised rents elsewhere in the country. However, the low rate of population growth owing tothe closure of the international border had reduced rental demand for units in large capital cities.While advertised rents for units had picked up more recently, they remained below their pre-pandemiclevel in Melbourne and were around their pre-pandemic level in Sydney.
Members noted that lockdowns since June had disrupted what had been a strong recovery in labour marketconditions. A significant number of workers had experienced reduced hours or been stood down, with totalhours worked declining by 3 per cent in the September quarter and employment falling by2 per cent (around 280, 000 people). The unemployment rate had declined; however, this wasprimarily because stood-down workers and those who had lost their jobs did not tend to look foralternative employment during lockdowns, so they were recorded as having left the labour force.Alternative measures of spare capacity that included these workers had peaked above11 per cent.
Nevertheless, the labour market had proven to be more resilient than during the national lockdowns in2020, and a swift recovery in labour market conditions appeared likely. This was partly because manyworkers had maintained attachment to their employers while on reduced or zero hours in states affected bylockdowns. Hiring intentions in New South Wales and Victoria had picked up ahead of the easing oflockdown restrictions. Liaison suggested that firms affected by lockdowns were reluctant to lay off staffgiven reported labour shortages and strong labour demand prior to the Delta outbreak. In line with theexpected recovery in activity, the unemployment rate was forecast to be a little below5 per cent at the end of 2021, before declining to around 4¼ per cent by the end of2022 and 4 per cent by the end of 2023. Employment was expected to rebound strongly in the nearterm before growing at a more moderate pace later in the forecast period as output growth settled aroundits longer-run trend.
Wages growth was expected to pick up as remaining wage freezes and cuts implemented in 2020 were unwoundand the labour market tightened. Forecast growth in the Wage Price Index had been revised up a little toaround 3 per cent by the end of 2023. Broader measures of labour costs, which includedincreases in the superannuation guarantee rate and non-wage benefits, were expected to grow at a slightlyfaster pace. Inertia in wage-setting practices was likely to moderate the increase in wages growth.Moreover, wages growth was starting from a low base – disaggregated data and information from theBank's liaison program suggested only a small share of workers were receiving increases in wages ofmore than 3 per cent. However, members acknowledged there was uncertainty around how wagesgrowth would respond to the unemployment rate being near 4 per cent for an extended period, asthere was little historical experience to draw on. The effect on overall labour market conditions of thereopening of the international border, including the effects on labour supply across different regionsand occupations, was also uncertain.
Inflation in the September quarter had been about ¼ percentage point higher than expected threemonths earlier, in both headline and underlying terms. Around two-thirds of the quarterly increase inheadline CPI was accounted for by increases in fuel prices and home-building costs. Growth inconstruction costs had picked up noticeably in the quarter, reflecting rising global materials prices andstrong demand for housing construction induced by domestic subsidies. Although prices of some consumerdurable goods had picked up as import price pressures persisted and demand remained strong, inflation hadbeen fairly subdued in other expenditure components. CPI rent inflation remained low; while advertisedrents had been rising at a faster pace, rents for newly leased dwellings made up only a small share oftotal rents.
Members noted that, in the central scenario, underlying inflation was expected to pick up graduallytowards the end of the forecast period. The inflation outlook allowed for the effect of higher housingcosts and imported goods inflation in coming quarters, and a subsequent steady pick-up in wages growth.Underlying inflation was expected to be around 2¼ per cent by the end of 2022 and around2½ per cent by the end of 2023. Headline inflation was expected to run above underlyinginflation in the near term, largely owing to the sharp increase in fuel prices.
While the forecast for inflation was higher than previously, members noted that the outlook for inflationin Australia differed from that for many other advanced economies. Unlike a few major economies, thelabour market participation rate in Australia had bounced back quickly. This flexibility in labour supplyimplied there would be less upward pressure on wages in Australia. In addition, the effect of globalsupply disruptions on inflation had been less pronounced in Australia than in other parts of the world, including in energy markets. And the starting points for inflation and wages growth were lower inAustralia than in many other advanced economies.
Members agreed that the distribution of possible outcomes for inflation had widened. If price pressures inglobal goods markets persisted for longer than expected, the extent of the pass-through to domesticprices could be stronger than in the central scenario. Workers might also demand higher wages ascompensation for higher inflation outcomes. If employers passed these increased wage costs on toconsumers, this would feed into higher inflation outcomes. However, it was also possible that globalgoods demand would ease over the coming year or so, around the same time that more goods supply came online. This could see price pressures in global goods markets dissipate and lead to lower inflationoutcomes in Australia.
Members concluded their discussion of the domestic economy by considering two alternative scenarios inlight of the considerable ongoing uncertainty around health outcomes and household consumption.
A stronger economic trajectory than the central scenario was possible if households increased spending bymore than expected. This could be the result of positive news on the health front and high rates ofvaccination leading to reduced uncertainty about the outlook and a boost in households' desire toconsume out of their rising wealth. These conditions would also support stronger private investment. Inthis upside scenario, the unemployment rate would decline more rapidly than in the central scenario, tobe around 3¼ per cent by the end of 2023, and the stronger labour market would see underlyinginflation increase to a little above 3 per cent over the same period.
Alternatively, a weaker trajectory could eventuate as a result of lingering uncertainty about the outlook, which would result in near-term precautionary saving, alongside possible adverse health outcomes, such asthe emergence of a new variant of COVID-19 or waning efficacy of vaccines inthe first half of 2022. The weaker economic environment would depress confidence, resulting in lowerconsumption and higher saving by households, and a slower recovery in private investment. Internationaltravel would also resume more slowly, delaying the recovery in trade in services. In this downsidescenario, subdued activity would push the unemployment rate to above pre-pandemic levels and weigh onwages growth. This would keep underlying inflation below 2 per cent over most of the forecastperiod.
International financial markets
Members commenced their discussion of international financial markets by noting that yields on governmentbonds had been volatile and had increased noticeably in advanced economies over the preceding month, reaching or surpassing levels seen earlier in the year. These developments had followed release of datathat had led to upward revisions to the inflation outlook by market participants, particularly for thecoming few years. This, in turn, had led to rising expectations that central banks would tighten policyearlier than had previously been thought likely, as well as an increase in risk premia, reflecting anincrease in uncertainty about the outlook for inflation and monetary policy.
A few central banks, including the Bank of Korea, Norges Bank and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, hadalready increased their policy rates. Market pricing suggested that a number of other central banks wereexpected to start increasing their policy rates in the subsequent few quarters. Some central banks hadremained focused on reducing the pace of asset purchases. The Bank of Canada had announced an end to thequantitative easing phase of its bond purchase program at its most recent policy meeting and indicatedthat it would purchase bonds only at the rate required to offset maturities, thereby keeping its bondholdings somewhat stable. The Bank of Canada had suggested that it would continue to do this until atleast the time of the first increase in its policy rate, which it anticipated would be around the middleof 2022, a little ahead of the previous projection. The US Federal Reserve was widely expected toannounce a reduction in its rate of asset purchases at its policy meeting later in November.
Members noted that, despite the increase in yields and the recent volatility, financial conditions overallhad remained accommodative in advanced economies. Interest rates and credit spreads for corporateborrowers had remained historically low. Equity prices in most major markets, including in Australia, hadremained around record highs, supported by well-received earnings reports.
In China, highly leveraged property developers had remained under pressure, although broader risksentiment had improved and overall financial conditions remained stable. The property developerEvergrande had averted default by making overdue coupon payments on offshore bonds, but it still hadseveral overdue coupon payments outstanding. Further, Chinese authorities had clarified that banks couldroll over funding to other highly indebted developers. Meanwhile, central banks in other emerging Asianeconomies had kept policy rates unchanged, while a number of others – particularly in LatinAmerican countries and in Russia – had tightened policy further in response to rising inflation.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, yields on longer-term government bonds had increased markedly alongside the global movementsin yields, although domestic developments had also played an important role. In particular, the recentimprovement in the domestic economic outlook and the stronger-than-expected CPI outcome for the Septemberquarter had led to an increase in market participants' expectations for inflation over the periodahead. An increase in uncertainty about the outlook for inflation, and the associated path for monetarypolicy, had also contributed to the increase in Australian bond yields in the form of higher risk premia.Members noted that lower liquidity in Australian bond markets compared with the major markets could leadto additional volatility and some overshooting during a period when markets are adjusting to significantnews. Consequently, the differential between yields on Australian Government bonds and US Treasuries hadwidened sharply in the period leading up to the meeting.
In this environment, the yield on the April 2024 target bond had also increased, although it had remainedwell below swap rates for the same maturity. In mid October, the Bank had purchased $1 billion ofthe April 2024 bond after yields on this bond had risen towards 20 basis points over a few days.Although the yield on the April 2024 bond had declined following that auction, it had risen furtherfollowing the CPI release, as markets had revised upwards their expectations for inflation and, therefore, had attached a higher probability to the Board discontinuing the yield target. The decision bythe Bank not to conduct target bond purchases during the period between the CPI release and the Boardmeeting had added to this market dynamic. Implied expectations of the future cash rate had also increasednotably over the preceding month to the highest levels seen this year, with several increases in the cashrate priced in by the end of 2022.
Reflecting the higher yield differential, the Australian dollar had appreciated from its recent lows, butremained lower than earlier in the year. Members noted that movements in the Australian dollar and othermajor currencies had not been particularly volatile.
Members noted that banks' funding costs had remained around historical lows and outstanding lendingrates had continued to edge lower in September. Members also observed that the increase of a few basispoints in bank bill swap rates in the days leading up to the meeting would, if sustained, be expected tolead to a small increase in bank funding costs. Total credit growth had picked up further insix-month-ended terms, with strong growth in both the business and housing components. Commitments forhousing loans had declined slightly, but had remained at high levels, with lower commitments forowner-occupiers partly offset by a rise in commitments for investors.
In early October, in response to risks associated with high and rising household indebtedness, theAustralian Prudential Regulation Authority increased the serviceability assessment rate that it expectsbanks to use to assess prospective borrowers' loan applications.
The future of payments
Members discussed a paper on the potential use of new digital assets in payments. They noted the rapidinnovation occurring at present and that some innovations, such as distributed-ledger technology andself-executing (or smart) contracts, could significantly change the financial sector. Members discussedthe likelihood that the payment instruments used in applications of the new decentralised finance (orDeFi) would be new tokenised versions of fiat currencies (either stablecoins or central bank digitalcurrencies (CBDCs)) rather than cryptocurrencies, which had numerous shortcomings as stores of value ormeans of payment. Members observed that, if stablecoins were to be used widely, they should be subject toregulation that ensured they were safe for users and promoted financial stability. They also noted theconsiderable risks associated with cryptocurrencies and the prospect that the recent boom, which was mostobvious in the ‘meme coins’, contained a significant speculative component. Securitiesregulators in many jurisdictions had warned that investors in cryptocurrencies could experience largelosses.
Members expressed their support for the work being done by the Bank in relation to CBDCs. This includeddevelopment of a limited proof-of-concept of a wholesale CBDC in 2019 and the recently completed ProjectAtom, which had involved four external parties and incorporated tokenised financial assets, with a reportto be published shortly. Bank staff are also working with the Bank for International Settlements'Innovation Hub and three other central banks to develop prototype shared platforms for cross-bordertransactions using CBDCs of different jurisdictions. Additionally, the staff are engaging with the newDigital Finance Cooperative Research Centre on possible CBDC projects.
Members observed that there had also been significant innovation in the more traditional payments system.The New Payments Platform was highlighted for its capability to deliver more than 19 million COVID-19 support payments in recent months, providing immediate value andmostly on weekends.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the Australian economy was recovering after theinterruption to growth caused by the Delta outbreak and was expected to bounce back quickly asrestrictions are eased further. A strong recovery in hours worked was already under way andforward-looking indicators of labour demand were consistent with strong employment over the comingmonths. The unemployment rate was expected to trend lower over the subsequent couple of years, to reach4 per cent by the end of 2023.
Inflation had increased, but remained low in underlying terms. Headline inflation was being affected byhigher prices for petrol and newly constructed homes, as well as strains in global supply chains. Afurther pick-up in underlying inflation was expected, but it would be only gradual. The Bank'scentral forecast was for underlying inflation to reach the mid-point of the target range by the end of2023. Wages growth remained subdued, but was expected to increase gradually as the labour markettightens.
Members acknowledged that the risks to the inflation forecast had changed, with the distribution ofpossible outcomes shifting upwards. The main uncertainties related to the persistence of the currentdisruptions to global supply chains and to the behaviour of wages at the lowest unemployment rate indecades.
Housing prices had continued to rise in most markets and housing credit growth had picked up, reflectingstronger demand for credit from both owner-occupiers and investors. Members continued to emphasise theimportance of maintaining lending standards at a time of historically low interest rates.
Members noted that financial conditions in Australia were still highly accommodative, with most lendingrates at record lows. Bond yields had increased recently, alongside increased uncertainty about theoutlook for inflation. Bond market volatility had also risen significantly. The exchange rate hadappreciated a little, but remained within the range of the preceding year.
Turning to the current monetary policy settings, members discussed the implications of revisions to theinflation outlook for the Bank's yield target for the April 2024 bond in particular. The yield targethad been introduced during the exceptional circumstances of March 2020 and the onset of the pandemic. Itwas part of a package of monetary policy measures designed to limit the damage to the Australian economyand to support its recovery. Members agreed that the policy package had been effective in delivering asubstantial easing in financial conditions and had contributed to the Australian economy being wellplaced to recover from the pandemic.
The introduction of the yield target had two motivations. The first was to keep funding costs low acrossthe economy by directly anchoring the short end of the yield curve. The second was to reinforce theBoard's forward guidance that the cash rate was very unlikely to be increased for three years, which, at the time, ran until March 2023. Members agreed that the yield target had been effective in achievingthese objectives. However, its effectiveness as a monetary policy tool had declined as expectations aboutinflation and future interest rates had begun to shift in light of progress towards the Bank's goals.This reduced effectiveness was evident in the markedly higher level of swap rates of similar maturitiesthat had flowed through to yields on bank and corporate bonds, which are typically priced off these swaprates.
The Board discussed three options for the yield target: to continue with the target of 10 basispoints for the April 2024 bond; to adjust the target by raising the target yield or shortening its tenor, say, to a bond maturing in 2023; or to discontinue the yield target altogether.
Members noted that the main argument for retaining the yield target was that it remained consistent withthe central forecast for the economy, which accorded with the cash rate remaining at its current leveluntil 2024. However, as the risks to the inflation forecast had shifted higher, it had become possiblethat an earlier increase in the cash rate would be appropriate. The shift in the distribution of possibleoutcomes was being reflected in other term interest rates in Australia. Members noted that retaining thetarget in these circumstances could result in the Bank purchasing all the freely tradable bonds in theApril 2024 bond line, so that trading in that bond would cease. This would further diminish theusefulness of the target as an effective anchor for other interest rates.
On the second option, the Board agreed that market participants could question the longevity of the yieldtarget it if were raised or its tenor shortened. In addition, changes of this nature were not consistentwith the Board's view that the yield target was an appropriate tool during an exceptional period, butnot one to be used on an ongoing basis.
Given these considerations and in light of the faster-than-expected progress towards the Bank's goalsand the revised outlook for inflation, the Board agreed on the third option – namely, todiscontinue the yield target altogether. In making this decision, members highlighted the importance ofcontinuing to communicate clearly that future decisions about the cash rate would be based on the stateof the economy and not particular dates on the calendar. Given the latest data and forecasts, the centralscenario for the economy continued to be consistent with the cash rate remaining at its current leveluntil 2024.
Members discussed the Bank's decision to stand out of the market in the days between the CPI releaseand the meeting. This had resulted in uncertainty about the Bank's policy intentions and had affectedmarket pricing and liquidity for a period. Members acknowledged that the Bank had faced the difficultchoice of entering a thin market in an effort to defend a target that was losing credibility or standingout of the market until the Board had an opportunity to consider the implications for monetary policy ofthe most recent data and the updated forecasts. Members acknowledged the Governor's authority toexercise discretion in implementing the Board's policy decisions. In that regard, the Board supportedthe Governor's decision to exercise discretion in these circumstances.
Members saw merit in reviewing the operation of the yield target and its effectiveness as part of thebroader package of monetary policy measures introduced in March 2020. This would be done in 2022 and inlight of additional information on the effect of the overall policy package on the Bank's goals.
Members then discussed the bond purchase program. The Board reaffirmed its previous decision to continuewith the program at the current rate of purchases until mid February 2022, when the program will bereviewed again. Members agreed that continuation of the program was appropriate to support the financialconditions that underpinned the central forecast scenario for inflation and unemployment. The Board'sreview of the program in February 2022 will be based on the same three considerations as the previousreviews – namely, the actions of other central banks, how the domestic bond market is functioning, and the actual and expected progress towards the Bank's goals for inflation and unemployment.
The Board remained committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve a return tofull employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. For inflation to be between2 and 3 per cent on a sustainable basis, the labour market will need to be tight enough togenerate materially higher wages growth than at the time of the meeting. The Board will not raise thecash rate until these criteria are met, and is prepared to be patient.
In view of the significance of the decision to discontinue the yield target, members supported theGovernor's intention to conduct a webinar later that afternoon, which would include a question andanswer session, to explain the Board's decision and provide an update on the economic outlook.
The decision
The Board decided upon the following policy settings:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlementbalances at zero per centcontinue to purchase government securities at the rate of $4 billion a week until at least midFebruary 2022discontinue the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bond.