Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 3 August 2021
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, EconomicAnalysis Department), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Financial Stability Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the globaleconomy had continued to recover from the largest contraction in decades, supported by a substantialfiscal and monetary policy response and the easing of measures to contain the virus in some countries.There were widening gaps in the outlook across economies, however, which largely reflected differencesin health outcomes and progress with the vaccination of populations. Higher vaccination rates and theassociated relaxation of containment measures had enabled a rapid recovery in several advancedeconomies, but in countries with low vaccine coverage, the rapid spread of the Delta variant of COVID-19 was tempering the economic outlook. Access to vaccines was an ongoingconcern for some emerging market countries and high case numbers were putting health systems underconsiderable strain.
The medium-term outlook for Australia's major trading partners generally remained solid. TheChinese economy continued to grow in line with pre-pandemic expectations. In a number of economies inAsia, strong global demand for goods had led to stronger export growth and increased investment inmanufacturing capacity, although a resurgence of the virus and restrictions on activity in somecountries were weighing on domestic demand. The recovery was expected to continue in countries in NorthAmerica and Europe where progress with vaccination programs allowed for an easing of containmentmeasures. Fiscal settings remained highly stimulatory in the United States.
Members noted that substantial spare capacity remained in most advanced economies' labour markets, despite the strong recovery in economic activity. In contrast to Australia, employment, participationrates and hours worked remained well below pre-pandemic levels in many countries. Lower labour forceparticipation in some countries reflected the impact of prolonged school closures on child careresponsibilities, lingering health concerns and ongoing provision of wage subsidies.
Headline inflation had picked up in a number of advanced economies. However, this was in large part theresult of pandemic-related disruptions, including supply chain bottlenecks and unusually high shippingcosts, which were likely to be temporary. Members observed that there were both upside and downsiderisks to global inflation in the near term, and that the outlook for inflation in the medium term wouldlargely depend on how quickly spare capacity in labour markets was absorbed and how wages responded tothis.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic developments, members noted that the recovery had established strongmomentum prior to recent outbreaks of the Delta variant of COVID-19. GDPhad recovered to its pre-pandemic level in the March quarter and timely indicators suggested that growthin private demand had remained strong in the June quarter. Labour market conditions had alsostrengthened further in the June quarter.
More recently, outbreaks of the Delta variant and accompanying lockdowns had introduced a high degreeof uncertainty to the outlook for the second half of 2021. Members observed that economic activity andemployment were expected to decline in the September quarter. The high transmissibility of the Deltavariant raised the possibility that a more gradual reopening of the economy in affected areas would beneeded compared with earlier episodes of lockdown restrictions. Under the assumption that furtherlengthy lockdowns would be limited, the economy was forecast to rebound from the current setback laterin the year as restrictions are eased, consistent with the previously observed pattern in Australia andoverseas.
Members noted that the prospects for recovery beyond the effects of the recent virus outbreaks aresupported by a number of factors. These include the underlying momentum in the economy and strengthenedbalance sheets prior to the recent virus outbreaks, the substantial fiscal support offered to householdsand businesses in areas affected by lockdowns, progress with the vaccination rollout and the ability ofthe economy to adapt. In the meantime, health outcomes would continue to present the main source ofuncertainty for the economic outlook.
Beyond the near term, the level of output at the end of the forecast period in 2023 was expected to bea little higher than had been forecast in May, underpinned by stronger private investment and publicdemand. Under the baseline scenario, GDP was forecast to grow by a little above 4 per centover 2022, and around 2½ per cent over 2023.
Members noted that household spending had been tracking strongly in the months prior to the recentlockdowns. Consumption had continued to recover over April and May before restrictions affected spendingin June. Timely indicators suggested that household consumption would contract in the September quarterin response to the extended lockdown in Greater Sydney and the shorter lockdowns elsewhere. This wasexpected to account for much of the quarterly decline in GDP. Later in 2021 and early the followingyear, consumption was forecast to recover in affected areas. The outlook for consumption in 2022 and2023 was expected to be supported by increased opportunities for spending on discretionary services asrestrictions are eased, together with higher household income and wealth. The household saving ratio wasexpected to increase temporarily in the September quarter, reflecting reduced consumption in areasaffected by the lockdowns, before declining steadily thereafter.
The outlook for dwelling and business investment would continue to be supported by accommodativefinancing conditions and fiscal policy measures. Recent lockdowns and restrictions on constructionactivity in Greater Sydney and elsewhere were anticipated to affect both residential and non-residentialinvestment in the September quarter, but this was generally expected to lead to plans being deferredrather than cancelled. Residential building approvals had eased, as expected, following the end of theapplication period for the HomeBuilder program. However, approvals remained at a high level and thelarge volume of residential building work in the pipeline was likely to support dwelling investment forsome time. The recovery in non-mining investment over the forecast period was expected to be led byspending on machinery and equipment, underpinned by tax incentives, high levels of business confidence, declining spare capacity and strong business balance sheets. Mining investment was at its highest levelsince 2017 and a further gradual increase was expected over the forecast period, mainly to replaceexisting capacity. Growth in mining investment was likely to be modest relative to the very high levelsof commodity prices.
Members noted that conditions in established housing markets remained strong, in contrast to theexperience during the extended lockdowns in 2020. National housing prices had increased further in Julyfollowing a 6 per cent increase in the June quarter. Prices for detached houses and units inSydney had continued to increase in July despite the lockdowns. Owner-occupiers had accounted for alarge share of purchases in the period to mid 2021, but investor activity had picked up in recentmonths. The number of newly listed properties for sale had declined recently; however, online auctionswere reported to have become more common and sales activity had held up well compared with theexperience during the lockdowns in 2020. Members also noted that advertised rents for houses hadcontinued to increase in recent quarters. In regional areas and smaller cities, growth in rents had beenstrong and vacancy rates remained very low. Rental conditions in apartment markets in Sydney andMelbourne had begun to stabilise following the earlier decline in rents.
Members observed that labour market conditions had continued to improve at a faster-than-expected pacethrough the June quarter. The unemployment rate had declined to 4.9 per cent in June andlabour force participation remained around record highs. The rate of underemployment was around itslowest level in a number of years. Growth in full-time employment had been particularly strong. Jobvacancies had been at record high levels and there had been ongoing reports of labour shortages in partsof the economy.
Improvements in labour market conditions were expected to reverse temporarily in the September quarteras a result of the lockdowns in Greater Sydney and other parts of the country. The restrictions onactivity were expected to result in a substantial decline in average hours worked. Labour forceparticipation was also expected to decline for a period as people delayed searching for work whilerestrictions on mobility remain in place, as had been seen during previous lockdowns. Some employmentlosses were expected, although a fall in labour force participation was anticipated to limit theincrease in the unemployment rate. The high level of job vacancies and increased fiscal support wouldalso help limit job losses. However, much would depend on health outcomes and the duration of thelockdowns.
Looking further ahead, members noted that the eventual lifting of restrictions and underlying strengthin economic conditions are expected to result in the labour market recovery regaining momentum. In thebaseline scenario, the unemployment rate was forecast to decline to around 4¼ per cent bythe end of 2022 and to 4 per cent by the end of 2023, which was lower than previouslyforecast. Members noted that, in the preceding half-century, this was a level that had been reached onlybriefly during the mining investment boom and in the early 1970s, when the structure of the economy hadbeen very different.
With the unemployment rate expected to decline to a lower level than previously forecast, wages growthand inflation were also expected to pick up at a slightly faster pace. The Wage Price Index was forecastto increase gradually to around 2¾ per cent by the end of 2023, and broader measures ofgrowth in labour costs were expected to be running at a slightly faster pace by that time.
CPI inflation increased to 3.8 per cent over the year to the June quarter, although most ofthis increase reflected the reversal of earlier large falls in certain prices related to the pandemic.Much of the 0.8 per cent increase in the June quarter was accounted for by large increases inthe prices of fuel and fruit and vegetables, and the unwinding of earlier electricity rebates. Membersobserved that there would continue to be some divergence between headline and underlying inflation assome of the recent one-off boosts to inflation were unwound. Underlying inflation had stabilisedrecently, and was a little below ½ per cent in the June quarter and1¾ per cent over the year. Underlying inflation was likely to remain subdued oversubsequent quarters, given the expected decline in activity in the September quarter and the absence ofbroad-based inflationary pressures, and then gradually increase to 2¼ per cent by the endof 2023.
Members discussed the balance of risks to the forecasts. The baseline scenario assumed that thedomestic vaccine rollout would accelerate in the months ahead, reducing the frequency and severity oflockdowns and allowing the international border to be reopened gradually from mid 2022. It alsoassumed that the Greater Sydney lockdown would extend through the September quarter, with some furtherbrief and/or less severe restrictions assumed to occur in parts of Australia in the Decemberquarter.
A downside scenario assumed more extended and widespread lockdowns and a more gradual reopening of theinternational border than in the baseline scenario. In this scenario, restrictions on the consumption ofdiscretionary services, coupled with precautionary behaviour, would be expected to result in a higherrate of household saving and lower household consumption. Private investment and services exports wouldalso be lower. Lower activity would result in the unemployment rate rising in subsequent months andremaining above 5 per cent over coming years. In this scenario, underlying inflation would beexpected to remain in the range of 1¼–1½ per cent through to 2023.
Members also considered an upside scenario premised on the assumption that the virus would be containedmore quickly than in the baseline scenario, with household consumption and private investment increasingrapidly once containment measures are lifted. In this scenario, households would be more willing andable to consume out of their savings and wealth than in the baseline scenario, supported by higherhousehold income and fewer restrictions on discretionary services. International travel would recovermore quickly once the international border was reopened, boosting services exports. In this scenario, the unemployment rate would be expected to decline more rapidly and by more than in the baselinescenario, with inflation increasing to the upper half of the target range by the end of 2023.
International financial markets
Yields on longer-term government bonds had fallen over preceding months in many countries, as optimismabout the global recovery was tempered by the rapid spread of the Delta variant of COVID-19 and the risks of future variants emerging. This had unwound much of theincrease in yields seen globally earlier in the year, which had reflected a faster-than-expectedeconomic recovery and a rise in inflation expectations to be more consistent with central banks'inflation targets. Much of the recent declines in longer-term bond yields in the United States andAustralia had reflected declines in real yields.
Despite the renewed concerns over the pace of the global economic recovery, market pricing implied thatthe expected path of central bank policy rates was still higher than at the start of the year. Somecentral banks were widely expected to lift policy rates before the end of 2021 because they were nearerto their inflation goals, while other central banks were not expected to raise their policy rates for anumber of years.
Several central banks had reduced their purchases of government bonds, or were soon expected to do so.Members observed that the Reserve Bank of New Zealand had halted its asset purchases in July and marketpricing implied that it was expected to start raising the policy rate before the end of 2021. This hadfollowed stronger-than-expected data, which suggested that capacity constraints were evident in the NewZealand economy.
Financing conditions for businesses in advanced economies had remained highly favourable. In corporatebond markets, spreads to risk-free rates had remained low and bond issuance had remained around, or insome cases above, pre-pandemic levels. Equity prices had remained high in these countries, includingAustralia. Share prices in the United States and Europe had been supported by recent positive earningsreports.
In China, equity prices had fallen sharply following a tightening of regulations on private-sectorcompanies in the technology and education sectors. More broadly, financial conditions in China had beensupported by an unexpected reduction in reserve requirements for banks. By contrast, some other emergingmarket central banks had started to raise their policy rates in response to rising inflation, despiteslow recoveries in output.
The US dollar had appreciated against most currencies over the preceding couple of months. TheAustralian dollar had correspondingly depreciated to around its lowest levels in 2021. Members notedthat this had occurred despite commodity prices being at high levels.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, the Bank's policy measures continued to underpin very low interest rates. Membersobserved there had been little movement in yields following the announcement of the Board'sdecisions in July to maintain the yield target for the April 2024 bond and to continue purchasinggovernment bonds, following the completion of the current program in early September 2021, at a reducedrate of $4 billion per week until at least mid November 2021.
With the ongoing lockdowns and other containment measures affecting economic conditions and the outlookin the near term, yields on longer-term Australian government bonds had declined by a little more thanthose globally, to be back around early 2021 levels. A number of market economists had suggested thatthe Board might reconsider its decision to taper bond purchases. Market pricing continued to implyexpectations that the cash rate would increase to around 25 basis points in the second half of2022, but the expected path thereafter was a little lower than it had been a month earlier.
Members discussed the fact that banks' funding costs and lending rates had drifted down to newlows. Funding costs had benefited from significant final drawdowns from the Term Funding Facility inJune and deposit rates having edged down further. In turn, average interest rates on outstanding housingand business loans had also continued to drift lower.
Credit growth had picked up in June for both households and businesses, although members noted thatthese data largely predated the recent lockdowns. Firms' demand for credit had picked up stronglyin June, with sizeable contributions from large and medium-sized businesses. This potentially reflectedthe pick-up in business confidence in preceding months and followed subdued demand over much of theprevious year. Demand for housing finance had strengthened further in June, with growth in housingcredit rising to nearly 6¾ per cent on a six-month-ended-annualised basis. Overall, itappeared that banks' lending standards were being maintained. Non-bank housing credit growth hadbeen particularly strong over recent months, with non-bank lenders benefitting from favourableconditions in securitisation markets.
Members noted that measures to contain the virus in a number of states might result in a reduction indemand for new loans from July, particularly if these measures remained in place for an extended period.Banks had offered support to household and business borrowers affected by the lockdowns, and theAustralian Prudential Regulation Authority had provided regulatory relief for these support measures, asit had done in 2020.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the recent outbreaks of the Delta variant ofCOVID-19 had interrupted the recovery and that the near-term outlook washighly uncertain and dependent on health outcomes. However, the economy had entered the current episodeof outbreaks and lockdowns with more momentum than previously expected, and fiscal and monetary policysupport was already cushioning the economic effects. Domestic financial conditions remained highlyaccommodative and the fiscal responses by the Australian Government and the state and territorygovernments were providing welcome support to the economy at a time of significant short-termdisruption.
Experience to date had been that, once virus outbreaks were contained, the economy bounced backquickly. The vaccination program would assist with containment of the virus and longer-term economicrecovery. Although uncertainty had increased, the central scenario was still that the Australian economywould grow strongly again next year. Prior to the recent outbreaks, the labour market recovery had beenstronger than expected. Job vacancies had been high and there had been ongoing reports of labourshortages in parts of the economy. The unemployment rate was expected to increase in the near term, butthen recover quickly when restrictions are eased and trend lower over 2022 and 2023 to reach around4 per cent at the end of 2023.
Members observed that wages growth and underlying inflation would remain subdued for some time yet, despite the positive medium-term outlook for output and employment. Headline inflation had spiked to betemporarily above the target in the June quarter as earlier pandemic-related price declines wereunwound. But, in underlying terms, inflation remained low. A pick-up in both wages growth and underlyinginflation was expected, but this pick-up was likely to be only gradual. In the Bank's centralscenario, it would take some years for the stronger economy to feed through into wage and priceincreases that would be consistent with the inflation target. Australia had no recent experience ofunemployment rates that had been sustained at the low levels being forecast. A significant source ofuncertainty was how wages and prices would behave at these low levels of unemployment.
Members noted that housing markets had continued to strengthen, with prices rising in all majormarkets. Housing credit growth had also increased. Given the environment of strong demand for housing, rising housing prices and low interest rates, members continued to emphasise the importance ofmaintaining lending standards and carefully monitoring trends in borrowing.
The Board remained committed to maintaining highly accommodative monetary conditions to support areturn to full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. Together, the low levelof the cash rate, the bond purchase program, the yield target and the ongoing funding that had beenprovided under the Term Funding Facility were providing substantial support to the Australian economy inthe face of the current lockdowns and the expected resumption of the economic expansion.
At its July meeting, the Board had decided to continue with the bond purchase program at a reduced rateof $4 billon a week, once the second $100 billion of purchases is complete in September 2021.This adjustment reflected the better-than-expected progress that had been made towards the Bank'sgoals and the improved outlook. The Board had agreed in July to keep the rate of bond purchases underreview and adjust the rate of purchases in either direction as appropriate.
The current virus outbreaks and lockdowns had interrupted the recovery and many households andbusinesses were facing difficult conditions. Members therefore considered the case for delaying thetapering of bond purchases to $4 billion a week currently scheduled for September 2021. They notedthat the outlook for the economy is for a resumption of strong growth in 2022. Members judged that anyadditional bond purchases would have their maximum effect at that time, with only a marginal effect atpresent, which is when the extra support might be required.
Recognising that fiscal policy is a more appropriate instrument than monetary policy for providingsupport in response to a temporary, localised reduction in incomes, members welcomed the substantialfiscal measures that had been announced. Given these considerations, the Board reaffirmed the previouslyannounced change in the rate of bond purchases. That said, the bond purchase program will continue to bereviewed in light of economic conditions and the health situation, and their implications for theexpected progress towards full employment and the inflation target. The Board would be prepared to actin response to further bad news on the health front should that lead to a more significant setback forthe economic recovery. In any event, the Board will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation issustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. The central scenario for the economyis that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting this condition will require the labourmarket to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than it is currently.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlementbalances of zero per centmaintain the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bondcontinue to purchase government securities at the rate of $5 billion a week until earlySeptember 2021 and then $4 billion a week until at least mid November 2021.