Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 3 December 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Present
Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, EconomicAnalysisDepartment), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Financial Stability Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Lynne Cockerell (Deputy Head, EconomicAnalysis Department)
Financial Markets
Members noted that interest rates were very low around the world, with a number of central bankshavingeased monetary policy over recent months in response to downside risks to the global economy andsubduedinflation. Market expectations for further policy easing by central banks had been scaled backoverprevious months, with concerns about the downside risks receding a little. The US FederalReserve hadindicated that any further reduction in the federal funds rate would require a material changein theeconomic outlook. Reflecting these developments, market pricing had pointed to a narrowing inthe degreeof uncertainty around the expected path for the federal funds rate. Globally, long-termgovernment bondyields had remained at very low levels, but had risen slightly in recent months as the prospectsforfurther easing in monetary policy had diminished.
Financing conditions for corporations remained very accommodative. Robust demand for corporatedebt hadseen spreads narrow between corporate bond yields and government benchmarks. US equity priceshad risento new highs over the prior month, and had increased significantly since the start of the yearrelativeto corporate earnings. Australian equity prices had also increased over the month, with the ASX200 returning to the highs reached in July.
Foreign exchange rates had been little changed over the previous month. The People's Bank ofChinahad continued to implement targeted easing measures to support financing conditions, whileremainingconscious of the need to contain financial stability risks. More broadly in emerging markets, centralbanks had eased monetary policy in recent months. However, political unrest remained a source ofvolatility for certain markets.
Members discussed the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy in Australia through financialmarkets. They noted that the reductions in the cash rate this year had been transmitted tobroaderfinancial conditions in ways that were consistent with the historical experience. Governmentbond yieldshad declined across the yield curve by more than 1 percentage point over the year, whichhad flowedthrough to lower funding costs across the economy. The Australian dollar had depreciated byaround6 per cent on a trade-weighted basis over the previous year and remained at the lowerend ofits range over recent times. The depreciation reflected the reduction in the interestdifferentialbetween Australia and the major advanced economies, and had occurred despite an increase in theterms oftrade over this period.
The recent reductions in the cash rate had been reflected in reduced funding costs for banks, andhadflowed through to lower borrowing rates for households. Average variable mortgage rates haddeclined byaround 65 basis points since the middle of the year, as competition for high-qualityborrowers hadremained strong and households continued to switch away from interest-only loans towardsprincipal-and-interest loans at lower interest rates. These trends were expected to continue.
Consistent with lower mortgage interest rates and improved conditions in some housing markets, housingloan commitments had been increasing over the preceding few months, particularly forowner-occupiers.Growth in credit extended to owner-occupiers had also increased a little in recent months, whilelendingto investors had still been declining.
Members noted that data from lenders and information from liaison suggested that only a smallshare ofborrowers had actively adjusted their scheduled mortgage payments following the reductions ininterestrates. This was consistent with historical experience in the months immediately following areduction inthe cash rate. However, the available data indicated that, even over the longer term, asinterest rateshad declined borrowers had not been paying down their home loans more quickly than in the past.Mortgagepayments as a share of aggregate household income had remained steady over recent years, although wereslightly lower than in the first half of the decade.
Interest rates on loans to businesses had also declined to historically low levels. Despite theaccommodative funding conditions for large businesses, growth in business debt had slowed, suggestingthat demand for finance had softened. Lending to small businesses had been little changed overthepreceding year, and access to finance for small businesses remained restricted.
Financial market pricing implied that market participants were expecting a further 25 basispointreduction in the cash rate by mid 2020.
Members discussed longer-term developments in the banking sector, including the strengthening ofprudential requirements and the opportunities and challenges presented by advances intechnology.Increased capital and liquidity after the financial crisis had made banks safer, but had alsoraised therelative attractiveness of some forms of market-based finance. Members discussed how advances intechnology opened up new opportunities for banks, while also introducing potential newcompetitors.
International Economic Conditions
Members observed that there had been little change in the global outlook over the previous month, butthat some of the downside risks had receded. The near-term uncertainty around US trade policyhaddiminished because some of the previously planned tariff increases had been postponed and therewas someprospect of an initial agreement between the United States and China. In addition, a ‘hardBrexit’ was assessed to be less likely.
Weak trade outcomes had continued to restrain growth in output, particularly for export-orientedeconomies. Survey indicators of manufacturing activity and export orders had stabilised, although theyremained at low levels. Surveyed conditions in the services sector had declined as weakerexternaldemand conditions had spilled over to sectors other than manufacturing. Members noted that eventhoughgeopolitical tensions had lessened recently, ongoing uncertainty had adversely affected theconfidenceand spending decisions of businesses. In the euro area, investment indicators had remained weakandbusiness confidence had declined further since September. In the United States, consumerspending hadbeen solid and employment growth had strengthened. Recently, some survey measures ofmanufacturing andservices activity had increased a little, although industrial production and surveyed investmentintentions had declined further in recent months.
Slower growth in China and India, largely unrelated to trade tensions, had also continued to be afeature of the recent pattern of global growth. In China, indicators of activity had been weakerinOctober. The real levels of retail sales and fixed asset investment had declined in October andtheoutput of a broad range of industrial products had remained subdued. Members noted that, inresponse toslowing growth, Chinese authorities had eased minimum equity capital requirements for a varietyofinfrastructure projects (including port, road, rail, logistics and ecological protectionprojects). InIndia, the extended monsoon season had exacerbated existing weakness in the economy.
Inflation remained low in the major advanced economies and was below target despite tight labourmarkets and higher wages growth. Members observed that inflation had generally declined in Asia.InChina, although headline consumer price inflation had increased, reflecting higher pork andother meatprices, core consumer price inflation had remained broadly unchanged at a relatively low rate.
Movements in commodity prices had been mixed since the previous meeting. The announcement offurthermeasures to support steel-intensive economic activity in China had supported iron ore prices. Atthesame time, reports of a tightening in coal import controls in China had weighed on coking andthermalcoal prices. Base metals prices had generally been lower since the previous meeting. Supplydevelopmentshad continued to support the prices of some rural commodities.
Domestic Economic Conditions
A number of indicators suggested that growth in Australia had continued at a moderate pace sincethemiddle of the year.
Members discussed survey measures of business confidence and conditions, and consumer sentiment.Business confidence had been below average and below its recent high levels in 2017 and early2018, withthe decline broadly based across industries. In contrast, survey measures of current businessconditionshad remained around average in recent months. Members noted that, historically, businessconditions hadbeen a better indicator of current economic activity than measures of business confidence, although itsmain advantage was timeliness rather than adding information not present in other indicators.
Growth in household disposable income had been weak over recent years, in both nominal and realterms.Members noted the importance of income growth as a key driver of consumption growth, althoughtheearlier downturn in the housing market had also had a noticeable effect. The recent recovery intheestablished housing market was expected to be positive for consumption growth in the periodahead.Retailers in the Bank's liaison program had suggested that nominal year-ended sales growthhad beenlittle changed in October and November.
Households' expectations about future economic conditions had declined significantly sinceJune.Members noted that the prolonged period of slow income growth had affected both consumersentiment andgrowth in household consumption. Members observed that the decline in sentiment had coincidedwith anincreasingly negative tone in news coverage of the economy. Notwithstanding this, households'assessment of their own financial situation relative to a year earlier had remained broadlysteady andsomewhat above average. Historically, households' assessments of their own financesgenerally havemattered more for household consumption decisions than their expectations about future economicconditions.
Conditions in established housing markets had continued to strengthen over the previous month.Housingprices had increased further in Melbourne and Sydney and this experience had been broadly basedacrossboth cities. Growth in housing prices had increased in Brisbane, Adelaide and regional areas, andhousing prices had increased in Perth for the first time in two years. Non-price indicators hadalsopointed to a strengthening of conditions in the established housing market: auction clearancerates hadremained high in Sydney and Melbourne, and auction volumes had picked up, albeit from a very lowbase.
By contrast, conditions in the new housing construction market had remained subdued. Residentialconstruction activity was expected to continue to contract for several quarters, despiteconditions inestablished housing markets having strengthened. Although there had been tentative signs of animprovement in conditions in some of the earlier stages of building activity, most indicatorshadremained weak, and most developer contacts in the liaison program were yet to report increasedsales ofnew housing.
Business investment appeared to have eased in the September quarter. Information from the ABSCapitalExpenditure (Capex) survey and preliminary non-residential construction data suggested thatnon-mininginvestment had decreased in the quarter, led by a marked decline in machinery & equipmentinvestment. The Capex survey had provided the fourth estimate of investment intentions for 2019/20. Non-mining investment in 2019/20 wasexpected to be weaker than previously envisaged, while the survey continued to suggest thatmininginvestment would contribute to growth over time, as firms invested to sustain – and insomeinstances expand – production.
Conditions in the labour market and wages data had shown little change since earlier in the year.Theunemployment rate had remained around 5¼ per cent in October. Employment haddeclined by19, 000 in October as both full-time and part-time employment had declined. This hadfollowed asustained period of stronger-than-expected employment growth, which had remained at 2 per centover the year despite the most recent monthly decline. The employment-to-population ratio andtheparticipation rate had both remained at high levels. Over the previous few months, measures ofthenumber of job advertisements had not changed much and firms' near-term hiring intentionshadremained broadly stable. Employment intentions among the Bank's liaison contacts hadgenerally beenmoderate, but had been weakest for firms exposed to residential construction.
The wage price index (WPI) had increased by 0.5 per cent in the September quarter, tobe2.2 per cent higher in year-ended terms, which was broadly as had been expected.Privatesector wages growth had been 2.2 per cent in year-ended terms, and had levelled out inrecentquarters following its gentle upward trend of the previous couple of years. This was consistentwithinformation from liaison that a larger share of firms expected wages growth to be stable (ratherthanincreasing) in the year ahead compared with a year or so earlier. Growth in the private sectorWPImeasure including bonuses and commissions had risen to 3 per cent in year-ended terms, whichwas the highest rate of growth since late 2012. This was consistent with information fromliaisonindicating that firms had been using temporary measures to retain and reward employees ratherthanpermanent wage increases. Public sector wages growth had slowed in the September quarterfollowing theone-off boost from the large wage outcome for Victorian nurses and midwives in the June quarter.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
Turning to the policy decision, members noted that there had been little change in the economicoutlooksince the previous meeting. Globally, financial market conditions had been more positive, asmarketparticipants' concerns about downside risks had receded a little and a number of centralbanks hadeased monetary policy. There were also signs of stabilisation in several recent economicindicators, particularly for the manufacturing industry.
Domestically, after a soft patch in the second half of 2018, the Australian economy appeared tohavereached a gentle turning point. GDP growth in the September quarter was expected to havecontinued at asimilar pace since the beginning of the year. Most of the partial data preceding release of thenationalaccounts had been in line with expectations, although non-mining investment had been weaker andpublicspending a little stronger. The outlook for growth in output continued to be supported by lowerinterestrates, the recent tax cuts, high levels of spending on infrastructure, a pick-up in the housingmarketand the improved outlook in the resources sector. However, members noted that weak growth inhouseholdincome continued to present a downside risk to consumer spending, and that a low appetite forrisk couldbe constraining businesses' willingness to invest. The drought in many parts of Australiawasanother source of uncertainty for the outlook.
Members observed that labour market conditions had been broadly unchanged since earlier in theyear.While this outcome had largely been in line with forecasts, it remained an area to monitor, bothbecausean improving labour market was important for its own sake and also because a tightening in thelabourmarket would put upward pressure on wages growth and inflation. It was noted that the currentrate ofwages growth was not consistent with inflation being sustainably within the target range, unlessproductivity growth was extraordinarily weak, nor was it consistent with consumption growthreturning totrend.
Members discussed the transmission to the economy of the interest rate reductions since themiddle ofthe year. They noted in particular that the available evidence suggested that more stimulatorymonetarypolicy had been working through the usual channels of lower bond yields, a depreciation of theexchangerate and lower interest rates on mortgages. There had also been an effect on housing prices, increasedhousing turnover in the established market and some early signs of a stabilisation in housingconstruction activity. The upturn in the housing market was a positive development for theeconomy inthe near term, but could become a source of concern if borrowing were to run too quickly aheadof incomegrowth.
Members also discussed community concerns about the effect of lower interest rates on confidence, noting the decline in business confidence and consumer sentiment this year. This decline hadcoincidedwith heightened economic uncertainty globally, a period of softer growth in the Australianeconomy andweakness in household income growth, and the Board had responded to these factors in precedingmonths.While members recognised the negative confidence effects for some parts of the community arisingfromlower interest rates, they judged that the impact of these effects was unlikely to outweigh thestimulusto the economy from lower interest rates.
In assessing the evidence, members noted that monetary policy had long and variable lags and thatindebted consumers may take some time before increasing their spending in response to a declinein theirmortgage interest payments. More generally, the persistently low growth in household incomescontinuedto be a source of concern for the consumption outlook. Economic growth and the unemployment rateremained broadly consistent with the forecasts, but members agreed that it would be concerningif therewere a deterioration in the outlook. As in other countries, there was no real concern ofinflationrising quickly.
The Board concluded that the most appropriate approach would be to maintain the current stance ofmonetary policy and to continue to assess the evidence of how the easing in monetary policy wasaffecting the economy. Members agreed that it would be important to reassess the economicoutlook inFebruary 2020, when the Bank would prepare updated forecasts. As part of their deliberations, membersnoted that the Board had the ability to provide further stimulus to the economy, if required.Membersalso agreed that it was reasonable to expect that an extended period of low interest rates wouldberequired in Australia to reach full employment and achieve the inflation target. The Board wouldcontinue to monitor developments, including in the labour market, and was prepared to easemonetarypolicy further if needed to support sustainable growth in the economy, full employment and theachievement of the inflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 0.75 per cent.