Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 3 March 2020
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Head, Domestic Markets Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, EconomicAnalysis Department), Bradley Jones (Head, International Department), Marion Kohler (Head, DomesticMarkets Department)
Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion by noting that, since the previous meeting, it had becomeincreasingly clear that the spread of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) beyond China would causea major disruption to economic activity around the world. Many countries were imposing travelrestrictions and businesses and individuals were electing not to travel. COVID-19 had also beencreating considerable uncertainty worldwide, leading to a significant reduction in risk appetites. Thisuncertainty meant that there was an increasing probability that people would seek to avoid gatherings, including public transport and perhaps workplaces.
These developments were evident in the significant changes in global financial markets outside of Chinain recent weeks. There had been sharp falls in the prices of risky assets and markets were finding itdifficult to price the risks, given their unprecedented nature.
In the advanced economies, equity markets had declined sharply from recent highs, with sectors mostexposed to COVID-19 disruptions experiencing particularly large falls. Spreads in corporate bondand money markets had widened, including in Australia, and issuance of corporate debt had slowed in lateFebruary after a strong start to the year. However, members noted that while spreads had widened, corporate borrowing costs had not risen much, if at all, because sovereign bond yields had declined tovery low levels. In a number of countries, including Australia, sovereign bond yields were at recordlows. On the whole, international financial markets were functioning effectively despite the sharp risein volatility.
Members then turned to a discussion of international policy responses. Following the sharp adjustmentto Chinese asset prices after the extended Lunar New Year break, the authorities in China had introduceda range of measures to forestall a tightening in financial conditions. This included monetary and fiscaleasing targeted at supporting smaller firms in particular, with policymakers also indicating awillingness to ease policies. These measures had underpinned a stabilisation of onshore equity andcredit markets. Elsewhere in the region, some central banks had also eased monetary policy, and modestfiscal measures were being deployed in some countries. Financial market volatility in the region hadincreased, but conditions had remained orderly.
Central banks in the major advanced economies had acknowledged the uncertainty created by the outbreakof COVID-19. Some had signalled a preparedness to provide further monetary policy accommodation ifconditions warranted. Market pricing had moved substantially, suggesting that central banks in theadvanced economies were expected to ease monetary policy at upcoming policy meetings. The expectationthat central banks in the advanced economies would soon respond with easier policy had contributed toyields on long-term sovereign debt declining to historic lows in many markets.
In foreign exchange markets, the Japanese yen had appreciated as concerns aboutCOVID-19 intensified. Members also noted that the US dollar had appreciated in recent monthsagainst most currencies. Regionally, the renminbi had been little changed and exchange rates in emergingAsia had depreciated somewhat, but in the context of broader US dollar strength. Members observedthat the Australian dollar was at its lowest level in more than a decade.
Domestically, members noted that issuance of bank debt had slowed recently, but this partly reflectedthe substantial volume of funding already to hand and the modest growth in bank credit. Bank fundingcosts had declined a little over the prior month, with a modest widening in spreads more than offset bysharp declines in risk-free rates. The reductions in the cash rate in the previous year had brought bankfunding costs to historic lows, with retail deposit rates having fallen further in recent months.
Lending rates were also at historic lows. While standard variable mortgage rates had declined byaround 60 basis points since mid 2019, the average rate paid on outstanding variable-ratemortgages had drifted down by an additional 10 basis points beyond that. Members noted that, ifthe downward drift in average rates paid continued at its recent pace, there would be full pass-throughof the previous year's reductions in the cash rate to the average mortgage rate bymid 2020.
Members discussed the factors contributing to this downward drift in average mortgage rates. Inparticular, ongoing strong competition for new high-quality borrowers had seen new and refinancingborrowers receive lower interest rates than those paid by existing borrowers. Improving transparencywould help address this. Some borrowers were also switching from interest-only loans toprincipal-and-interest loans, which had lower interest rates.
Members observed that the growth in housing credit for owner-occupiers had increased a little over theprevious six months or so, but housing credit was growing more slowly than housing loan commitments, consistent with a rise in mortgage payments over this period. Loan commitments to investors hadincreased modestly over the same period, while housing credit for investors had stopped decliningrecently.
Market pricing suggested that market participants expected the cash rate target to be cut by25 basis points at the present meeting, and again by June.
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that the spread of COVID-19 wasexpected to affect global growth in 2020 by more than had been factored into the forecasts presented atthe previous meeting.
Actions taken by Chinese authorities to limit the spread of COVID-19 had severely restrictedeconomic activity in China in the March quarter and there continued to be significant uncertainty aboutthe size and persistence of this disruption. While industrial output was typically lower in the Marchquarter because of the Lunar New Year holiday period, production had remained at holiday levels for muchlonger than usual. Coal consumption by power plants had also remained around the low levels typical ofthe Lunar New Year period. Members noted that this had not reduced demand for coal imports, whichsuggested that there had been a significant decline in China's domestic coal production. Iron oreimports also had not been significantly affected. Business conditions in China in February haddeteriorated by much more than expected and supplier delivery times had increased sharply, indicatingthat there had also been disruptions to supply chains. Retail activity and residential property saleshad been subdued.
Chinese GDP was expected to rebound later in 2020 as businesses seek to make up lost production and arange of stimulus and tax relief measures from the Chinese Government take effect. Some governmentmeasures, including direct support for manufacturers of medical equipment, were intended to supportcontainment efforts, while others, such as assistance to affected small businesses, were designed toreduce the adverse economic spillovers from COVID-19.
Given the disruptions to logistics and other transportation in China, forecasts for global oil demandhad been scaled back considerably and oil prices had fallen. This would lead to a decline in headlineinflation globally. The prices of other commodities that tend to be responsive to changes in the outlookfor global demand, including base metals, had also fallen since the start of 2020. Prices for liquefiednatural gas had also declined. Prices of other bulk commodities had been little changed in net terms;iron ore prices had reversed an earlier fall, even as Chinese steel inventories had increased, possiblyin anticipation of a pick-up in demand as economic activity rebounded.
Growth in other Asian economies was also expected to be lower in the March quarter than previouslythought, reflecting a combination of lower Chinese domestic demand, less Chinese outbound travel andsupply chain disruptions. Early indicators of trade activity in the Asian region in February haddeclined, following a period where trade, industrial production and manufacturing indicators in the moreexport-oriented economies had stabilised, amid signs of stabilisation in the global electronics cycle.Overall, growth in Australia's major trading partners was expected to be around½ percentage point lower in 2020 as a result of COVID-19.
In the major advanced economies, GDP data for the December quarter had been weaker than expected forJapan and the euro area, while GDP growth in the United States had been relatively resilient. Eventhough employment growth had eased over 2019 in the major advanced economies, unemployment rates hadcontinued to edge lower. Prior to any supply disruptions related to COVID-19, industrial production inthe euro area had continued to decline, particularly in the auto sector. Members noted that, to date, there had been no reports that supply disruptions were contributing to these declines. Some surveymeasures of business conditions in the United States and Japan had deteriorated sharply in February, butinvestment intentions and business sentiment in the United States had been more positive.
Domestic Economic Conditions
Members noted that the December quarter national accounts would be released the day after the meeting.Quarterly GDP growth was expected to have remained moderate, reflecting ongoing weak growth in householdconsumption and a further decline in dwelling investment. The bushfires over the summer months wereexpected to have affected growth in both the December quarter 2019 and the March quarter 2020, afterwhich recovery efforts were expected to boost growth.
Members noted that economic activity in the first half of 2020 would be significantly affected by theglobal response to the COVID-19 outbreak. Services exports (which comprise around5 per cent of GDP) were expected to decline by around 10 per cent in the Marchquarter, mainly because of a steep decline in inbound arrivals, including students, particularly fromChina. This effect alone was expected to lower Australian GDP growth by around ½ percentagepoint in the March quarter. Tourism and education exports were expected to remain low in the Junequarter, before returning to their previous levels over the second half of the year as the Chineseeconomy recovers and travel resumes. Members observed that this estimate did not include possibleeffects on domestic activity of supply chain disruptions and public health safety interventions toreduce the likelihood of transmitting COVID-19.
Information from the capital expenditure (capex) survey and preliminary data on non-residentialconstruction work done suggested that both non-mining and mining investment had decreased in theDecember quarter, led by weakness in building and engineering investment. However, mining firms hadcontinued to expect solid growth in investment over the rest of 2019/20.The capex survey had also reported firms' investment intentions for 2020/21 for the first time. The responses suggested that mining investmentwould increase strongly, consistent with the most recent set of forecasts and the messages from liaisonwith businesses, while non-mining investment was expected to remain subdued.
National housing price growth had remained robust in February and most capital cities had experiencedat least moderate price increases. The strong growth in housing prices had also encouraged more newresidential listings, albeit from very low levels. Turnover had increased, which, by itself, wasexpected to help support other types of spending. Indicators of activity at the earlier stages ofresidential building had remained consistent with a turnaround in activity in the second half of 2020, especially for detached dwellings. However, data on residential building work done indicated dwellinginvestment had decreased again in the December quarter, driven by a further decline in the constructionof new dwellings.
Growth in household consumption was expected to have been subdued in the December quarter; retail salesvolumes had increased modestly and there had been further declines in motor vehicle sales in thequarter. A few categories of spending that are most correlated with housing activity had picked up inthe quarter. The drought had continued to affect food prices and the volume of food sales had declinedin the quarter. Members noted that growth in consumption in the first quarter of 2020 could be weakerthan expected if the COVID-19 outbreak induced some households to cancel or defer internationaltravel or disrupted supply chains for imported consumer durables. Although there was considerableuncertainty about the size of the net effect on GDP, it was expected to be small based on the availableevidence.
Employment had grown by 1.9 per cent over the year to January, which was stronger than growthin the working-age population. However, the unemployment rate had increased to 5.3 per cent, reversing the small decline in the previous month, and the underemployment rate had increased to8.6 per cent. The unemployment rate had been around 5¼ per cent for most of thepreceding year. Members noted that the labour force data could be volatile from month to month and thatit was too soon to know if the modest rise in these measures of spare capacity signalled a change intrend. The wage price index confirmed that growth in wages had remained steady at low rates in theDecember quarter, consistent with information from liaison with businesses, which suggested that wageoutcomes had become increasingly concentrated in the 2–3 per cent range. Wages growthhad slowed a little in some industries. These data and reports from liaison with businesses suggestedthat wages growth was unlikely to pick up in the near future.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that it was becoming increasingly clear thatCOVID-19 would cause major disruption to economic activity around the world. The outbreak hadoccurred in the context of a global economy that was gradually emerging from a soft patch in trade andmanufacturing activity. However, following the outbreak, growth in output in China and other economieswas expected to be significantly lower in the first half of the year, reflecting a combination of lowerdomestic demand, less travel and supply chain disruptions. The recent outbreaks of COVID-19 outsideof China, and intensified efforts to contain its further spread, raised the prospect of a broader andmore extended disruption to the global economy. It was too early to tell how persistent these effectswould be and at what point economic activity would rebound. In response to the outbreak, policy measuresto support growth had been announced in several countries, including China. Inflation remained subduedin most advanced economies, despite low unemployment rates.
Financial markets had been more volatile as market participants assessed the implications of COVID-19, with the prices of many risky assets falling sharply. The uncertainty generated by the outbreak, and anexpectation that central banks would respond with easier policy, had resulted in long-term governmentbond yields falling to historic lows in many countries, including Australia. The Australian dollar haddepreciated to be at its lowest level in more than a decade. Australia's financial markets wereoperating effectively, and the Bank would continue to ensure that the Australian financial system hadsufficient liquidity.
The advent of COVID-19 around the world was having a significant effect on the Australian economy, particularly in the education, transport and tourism sectors. The uncertainty associated with theoutbreak was also likely to affect household spending and business investment in coming months. As aresult, GDP growth in the March quarter was likely to be noticeably weaker than previously expected, andit was difficult to predict how long it would take for the economy to return to more usual levels ofactivity. Once the disruptions passed, GDP growth was expected to pick up, supported by the low level ofinterest rates, high levels of spending on infrastructure, the lower exchange rate, stronger investmentin the resources sector and recoveries in residential construction and household consumption. TheAustralian Government had also indicated that it would assist areas of the economy most affected by theCOVID-19 outbreak.
Given these developments, members considered how best to respond, noting that even prior to theCOVID-19 outbreak, progress towards full employment and the inflation target had been expected tobe only gradual. The COVID-19 outbreak was expected to delay that progress further.
In discussing a possible monetary policy response, members welcomed indications from the AustralianGovernment that fiscal measures would be taken to support investment, the cash flow of affectedbusinesses and jobs. They also discussed the support that lower interest rates would provide to jobs andeconomic activity through a lower exchange rate and a boost to aggregate cash flows for households andbusinesses. Members recognised that the combined monetary and fiscal responses would help the economydeal with the challenges posed by COVID-19.
As part of their deliberations, members considered a number of scenarios, including one where theCOVID-19 outbreak would be contained in the very near future and where there would be a rapidrecovery in economic activity. In that scenario, the maximum effect of any additional monetary policystimulus would be felt in the recovery phase, rather than in the short term, when policy support wouldmost be needed. However, this scenario was considered very unlikely, with the more realistic scenariobeing that the outbreak would have a significant effect on the Australian economy.
Members also discussed the risk that a further reduction in interest rates could encourage additionalborrowing at a time when there was already a strong upswing in the housing market. In the currentcontext of heightened uncertainty, that risk was not viewed as particularly high relative to thebenefits from lower interest rates.
The Board concluded that it was appropriate to ease monetary policy further in response to the globalCOVID-19 outbreak to provide additional support to employment and economic activity. Members agreedthat it was reasonable to expect that an extended period of low interest rates would be required inAustralia to reach full employment and achieve the inflation target. Members also agreed on theimportance of monitoring the rapidly changing developments closely in subsequent weeks and maintainingcontact to assess the implications of the COVID-19 outbreak for the economy. The Board was preparedto ease monetary policy further to support the Australian economy.
The Decision
The Board decided to lower the cash rate by 25 basis points to 0.5 per cent.