Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 3 May 2022
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary)
Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic AnalysisDepartment), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by noting that inflation had risenfurther in recent months, and in many advanced economies was higher than it had been in several decades.The strong recovery in global demand, ongoing disruptions to global supply chains and increases incommodity prices following Russia's invasion of Ukraine had contributed to inflation significantlyexceeding earlier forecasts and being well above central banks' targets. As a result, central bankshad hastened the pace at which they were withdrawing policy accommodation. Members noted that inflationdevelopments over prior months had clouded the global outlook and, alongside the effects of the war inUkraine, had prompted a significant downgrade in global growth expectations.
Real wages in advanced economies had fallen over the preceding year as consumer prices increased by morethan wages despite the tightening in labour markets. Members noted that this reduction in householdpurchasing power had contributed to sharp falls in consumer sentiment in a number of economies –particularly in the euro area and the United Kingdom, where electricity and gas prices had risenmarkedly. Further declines in real wages were likely as prices continued to increase more rapidly thanwages. Members observed that this created additional uncertainty about the outlook for householdconsumption, despite some countries employing fiscal measures to address cost-of-living pressures andhousehold balance sheets generally being in good shape. The effects on consumption from the sharpincreases in food and energy prices were likely to be largest for low-income households, particularly incommodity-importing economies.
Members noted that commodity prices remained high and volatile. The disruptions to global energy suppliesresulting from Russia's invasion of Ukraine had occurred at a time when supply chains were alreadystrained, in large part owing to strong underlying demand; global shipping costs had risen further as oilprices increased. While analysts' forecasts and market pricing had indicated that energy andnon-energy commodity prices were expected to decline over the course of 2022, this was to levels thatwere still substantially higher than before the war. Prices for some agricultural products, particularlywheat, had risen further. A sharp increase in fertiliser prices had raised concerns about rationing byfarmers, which could depress agricultural output and sustain upward pressure on some food prices in theperiod ahead. Other commodity price movements had been mixed and most metals prices had eased from recenthighs.
Members agreed that the economic outlook in China had become significantly more challenging. The risk offurther disruptions to global goods supply had increased, as restrictions on mobility were imposed inparts of China following recent outbreaks of COVID-19. The authorities hadcontinued with actions to suppress the virus while easing fiscal and monetary policy in support of therecently announced growth target for 2022. Timely indicators suggested that mobility restrictions wereweighing on consumer spending, manufacturing activity and movements through Chinese ports. And while theeffects on Chinese exports had been modest to date, members noted that disruptions to goods productionand distribution networks would become more evident if there were further outbreaks of COVID-19. In such an event, there would be additional pressure on globalsupply chains and the price pressures for globally traded goods would persist.
Members observed that the recent downgrade to the outlook for global growth had followed a strong reboundin activity. In advanced economies, this strength had been underpinned by the relaxation of mobilityrestrictions and accommodative policy settings. Consumption of goods remained strong, even as theconsumption of services normalised. The recovery in economic activity in many emerging market economieswas well underway, but less advanced. The robust recovery in activity in many advanced economies had seenunemployment rates decline to around generational lows and high levels of job vacancies indicated strongongoing demand for labour. Economies with very tight labour markets, such as the United States and theUnited Kingdom, were experiencing particularly rapid increases in labour costs and broad-based pricepressures.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic conditions, members observed that price pressures were intensifying and therewas upward pressure on wages. Activity and conditions in the labour market had been resilient in the faceof global and domestic supply shocks, and strong underlying momentum was expected to be sustained overthe course of the year.
The key domestic development since the previous meeting was that inflation had increased to its highestrate in many years. Headline inflation was 2.1 per cent in the March quarter and5.1 per cent over the year. Fuel and new dwelling costs accounted for around half of thequarterly increase. Trimmed mean inflation had increased to 1.4 per cent in the quarter and3.7 per cent in year-ended terms. This increase in underlying inflation was consistent with abroadening of inflationary pressures.
Information from the Bank's liaison program indicated that upstream price pressures were increasinglybeing passed on to final consumer prices of many goods, as supply chain pressures persisted and demandremained strong. Members noted it was possible that firms' price-setting behaviours were undergoing achange from the pre-pandemic period, with businesses becoming more confident that raising prices wouldnot significantly reduce demand or erode their competitive position.
The forecasts for inflation had been revised materially higher compared with those presented three monthsearlier. Headline inflation was expected to peak at around 6 per cent in year-ended terms, andtrimmed mean inflation at around 4¾ per cent, in the second half of the year. Headlineinflation was expected to be boosted by large increases in the prices of fuel and new dwellings over theremainder of 2022, and to remain higher than underlying inflation for some time. As supply-sidedisruptions eased, both headline and underlying inflation were forecast to moderate to around the top ofthe 2 to 3 per cent target range by mid-2024. The underlying drivers of inflation wereanticipated to evolve over the forecast period, with the effects of global supply-side disruptions anddwelling cost inflation easing while domestic labour costs picked up. These forecasts were based on anassumption of further increases in interest rates, in line with expectations derived from surveys ofprofessional economists and financial market pricing.
In their discussion of the labour market, members noted that conditions had strengthened further since thestart of the year and were the tightest in many years. The unemployment rate had been steady in March buthad declined over the first quarter as a whole, and the participation rate and employment-to-populationratio were both at historically high levels. High vacancy rates and other leading indicators of labourdemand suggested that employment growth was likely to remain strong over the remainder of the year. As aresult, the unemployment rate was forecast to decline to around 3½ per cent in early 2023, alittle lower than previously expected, and to remain around this level for some time. This would be thelowest rate of unemployment in almost half a century.
Members observed that information received over the preceding month, particularly through the Bank'sliaison program, had indicated that labour costs were rising at a faster pace and that this was likely tocontinue. Liaison indicated that many firms were having difficulty hiring workers with the right skills.Given the tight labour market and increase in job mobility, more firms were having to pay higher wages toattract and retain staff, and labour costs were picking up at a faster rate than over the preceding year.Looking ahead, growth in the Wage Price Index (WPI) was forecast to be around 3¾ per cent bythe end of the forecast period, which would be the fastest pace since 2012. The outlook for broadermeasures of labour costs had also been revised up; average earnings were expected to increase at a fasterpace than the WPI, as firms turned to bonuses, allowances and other measures to attract and retainworkers. While the inertia arising from multi-year enterprise agreements and current public sector wagespolicies would continue to weigh on aggregate wages growth in the near term, a period of faster growth inlabour costs overall was in prospect.
Turning to activity, the disruptions of the Omicron outbreak and the east coast floods had caused theeconomic recovery to slow in the March quarter. However, strong growth was expected to resume over theremainder of the year as household spending patterns continued to normalise and incomes rose. Thesignificant increase in commodity prices was set to see the terms of trade peak later and at a higherlevel than previously assumed, boosting national income. Overall, the growth outlook remained positivefor the current and subsequent year. Output was expected to expand by 4¼ per cent in 2022, inline with previous forecasts. Growth was then expected to moderate to 2 per cent in 2023 as therecovery matured and the extraordinary policy support put in place during the pandemic was withdrawn.
Timely indicators suggested that household consumption had been resilient to disruptions in the Marchquarter. The outlook was for consumption to grow at a solid pace in the current and subsequent year, supported by strong household balance sheets and a further increase in disposable income. The householdsaving rate, which was still high, was expected to decline over coming years. However, higher interestrates, higher inflation and slower growth in household wealth (including housing prices) were expected toweigh on consumer spending in the period ahead. Members also noted that the pressure on household budgetsfrom recent increases in fuel and food prices would be felt most acutely by lower-income households, which typically have smaller savings buffers and spend a larger share of their income on essential items.
The outlook for dwelling and business investment remained positive, although capacity constraints relatedto materials and skilled labour shortages was a growing challenge for firms. Dwelling investment had beencurtailed by supply disruptions, including poor weather conditions on the east coast, but was expected toremain at a high level given the large pipeline of work. Non-mining business investment had also beendisrupted by supply issues in late 2021, but was expected to pick up momentum in the period ahead. Mininginvestment had remained subdued despite the strength in commodity prices; however, a modest increase wasexpected over the forecast period, owing to sustaining investment for some major iron ore and energyprojects, as well as increased exploration and production for some metals and minerals. The pipeline ofpublic engineering work was anticipated to support a high level of public investment for several years.
Members noted that housing market conditions had become more varied across the country in precedingmonths. Prices had declined a little in Sydney and Melbourne alongside falling auction volumes andclearance rates. However, in most other capital cities and regional areas, price growth remained strong, supported by a low number of properties for sale. Growth in advertised rents had also been particularlystrong in these parts of the country, consistent with very low vacancy rates. The flooding events inrecent months were expected to add short-term pressure to rental markets in affected regions on the eastcoast.
Public spending had declined at the end of 2021, but was expected to increase strongly over the first halfof 2022 and remain at a high level over the forecast period, in line with projections in the latest stategovernment updates and the Australian Government Budget.
Members noted that the recovery in services trade would boost both exports and imports, although overallnet trade was expected to reduce output growth slightly over the forecast period. Resource exports hadbeen adversely affected over the second half of 2021 by weather and maintenance-related disruptions, andmanufactured exports continued to be affected by global supply-chain disruptions. The recent strength inrural exports was expected to continue on account of favourable growing conditions and strong globaldemand for grains amid supply disruptions in Eastern Europe. A recovery in travel and education exportswas in train following the reopening of Australia's international border. Import volumes wereexpected to increase at a solid pace in the period ahead, in line with the strength in domestic demandand recovery in travel imports.
Members concluded their discussion of the outlook by noting several sources of risk and uncertainty.Globally, it remained uncertain how and when supply-side problems would be resolved. Recent events– including Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the responses to COVID-19 outbreaks in China – posed additional upside risks to inflationand downside risks to global growth. Another source of uncertainty related to how household spending inadvanced economies, including in Australia, would respond to a period of rising interest rates and thedecline in real wages. Some Australian households had incurred more debt than previously and many hadnever experienced rising interest rates. Housing prices in Australia could also be more sensitive torising interest rates than assumed, which would be likely to result in lower household wealth andconsumption. At the same time, there was also potential for consumer spending in Australia to be strongerthan forecast, given that households in aggregate had not begun to draw down on the savings accumulatedduring the pandemic and the high household saving rate could normalise more quickly than assumed. Anothersource of domestic uncertainty related to the behaviour of prices and labour costs at unusually lowlevels of unemployment, given the limited recent historical experience to draw on. The extent to whichthe reopening of the international border would alleviate acute areas of labour shortages was alsouncertain, given that the border reopening would also add to demand in the economy.
International financial markets
Global financial conditions had become less accommodative over the preceding month, reflectingsurprisingly high inflation outcomes and upward revisions to the expected paths of policy rates for mostadvanced economies.
Most central banks had begun to withdraw some of the substantial monetary stimulus that had been put inplace in response to the pandemic. Several central banks had raised their policy rates. The Bank ofCanada and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand had both raised their policy rates by 50 basis pointsduring the preceding month. Members noted that Sveriges Riksbank had increased its policy rate by25 basis points, in response to higher-than-expected inflation, having indicated as recently asFebruary that it did not expect to increase its policy rate until at least 2024. A number of othercentral banks – including the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England – were expected toraise their policy rates again in early May. Members noted that expectations for the European CentralBank's first rate increase had been brought forward and that many market participants thought thiscould occur as early as July.
Several central banks in advanced economies had indicated that they were seeking to return policy rates toa neutral setting quickly, and may increase policy rates further thereafter, to avoid the risk of a risein longer-term inflation expectations to levels that would be inconsistent with their inflation targets.Members noted that there was significant uncertainty around estimates of what level of policy rates wouldbe consistent with a neutral setting and that these estimates could change over time.
In addition, several central banks had decided to allow their asset portfolios to decline gradually asbonds matured, or they planned to start that process soon. The US Federal Reserve had indicated that itwas likely to start allowing its bond holdings to begin declining following its May meeting at a fasterpace than market participants had expected earlier in 2022. By contrast, the European Central Bank hadindicated that it was likely to cease asset purchases in July, but would maintain the size of theportfolio for an extended period after it had commenced raising its policy rate. The Bank of Japan hadincreased its purchases of 10-year government bonds to maintain its target of 0 ± 25 basis pointsfor 10-year yields.
Since the beginning of the year, government bond yields had risen substantially, driven by expectations ofhigher inflation and the withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus. The relatively large increase in USTreasury yields had contributed to a significant appreciation of the US dollar since the beginningof the year, while the relative stability of yields on Japanese Government bonds had contributed to adepreciation of the yen. Members noted that the Australian dollar had also depreciated since the previousmeeting, but had remained above its levels at the beginning of the year on a trade-weighted basis.
Credit spreads on corporate debt had increased, although investors expected borrowers to be generally wellplaced to withstand higher interest rates. Most major equity markets had declined, reflecting revisionsto the expected path of monetary policies and a deterioration in the near-term outlook for growth inChina. Equity prices in Australia had been little changed since the beginning of the year, as theresources sector had benefited from the high level of commodity prices.
Monetary policy in China had been eased a little further amid headwinds to growth. Chinese equity marketshad declined significantly since the start of the year and the renminbi had depreciated noticeably overthe preceding month; this was consistent with the declining differential between interest rates in Chinaand the United States, and signs that growth in China had slowed. Members also noted that there had beena net outflow of foreign portfolio investor capital from China in 2022.
Domestic financial markets
Domestic financial conditions had remained very accommodative, although a range of market interest rateshad risen further. Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities had risen by around 40 basispoints since the previous meeting, exceeding 3 per cent for the first time since 2015. Membersobserved that market participants had brought forward their expectations for an increase in the cash ratefollowing the Board's decision at the April meeting, the minutes from that meeting and thehigher-than-expected CPI outcome. Market pricing implied expectations of an increase in the cash rate ofat least 15 basis points at the present meeting, and a further 25 basis point increase in June.Market participants expected the cash rate to increase to around 2½ per cent by the end of2022. Most market analysts also expected an increase in the cash rate target at the present andsubsequent meetings.
Wholesale funding costs for banks (which are linked to money market interest rates) had risen, butbanks' overall funding costs and lending rates had remained low. The sharp rise in long-term yieldshad also seen fixed rates for new loans rise further, although competitive pressures had seen both newand average outstanding variable mortgage rates drift down to new lows. Growth in total credit hadremained close to its fastest pace of the preceding decade, and demand for housing finance had remainedrobust. Growth in housing credit to owner-occupiers had eased slightly, although growth in credit tohousing investors had picked up further. Growth in business debt had remained high, driven by theborrowing of larger firms. Members noted the importance of banks maintaining their lending standards.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members noted the underlying strength of the Australian economy andits ongoing resilience. The monetary and fiscal policy measures that had been put in place to support theeconomy through the pandemic, alongside the rapid development of COVID-19vaccines, had contributed to this positive outcome.
The Australian economy was being supported by household and business balance sheets that were generally ingood shape, an upswing in business investment and a large pipeline of construction work. Macroeconomicpolicy settings also remained supportive of growth and national income was being boosted by highercommodity prices.
The resilience of the Australian economy was particularly evident in the labour market. Members noted thatthe unemployment rate had declined over prior months to multi-decade lows and labour force participationhad increased to a record high. The Bank's central forecast was for a further decline in theunemployment rate to around 3½ per cent by early 2023. Members noted that aggregate wagesgrowth had been subdued during 2021 and was no higher than prior to the pandemic. However, more timelyevidence from liaison and business surveys indicated that labour costs were rising in a tight labourmarket and a further pick-up was likely over the period ahead.
Inflation in the March quarter had increased substantially and was above the target range of 2 to3 per cent. Although the rise in inflation largely reflected global factors, members noted thatstrong domestic demand and capacity constraints were also playing a role. This was evident in thebroadening of inflationary pressures, with firms more prepared to pass through cost increases to consumerprices. Inflation was expected to increase further in the near term but decline back towards the top ofthe target range by mid-2024 as supply-side disruptions are resolved. These forecasts were based on atechnical assumption of the cash rate increasing to around 1¾ per cent by the end of 2022 andaround 2½ per cent by the end of 2023.
The Board considered whether the condition that it had earlier set for an increase in the cash rate hadbeen met. This was for actual inflation to be sustainably within the 2 to 3 per centtarget range, which was likely to require a faster rate of wages growth than had been experienced overthe preceding years.
Inflation was now above the target and was not forecast to return to the target range until mid-to-late2024. While the significant rise in inflation had been largely the result of global factors, which werelikely to have a more temporary effect on inflation, the flow of information on inflation and wages overthe preceding month had been consistent with more persistent inflationary pressures arising from limitedspare capacity in the domestic economy. Members observed that it would be more difficult to returninflation to the target if the inflation psychology in Australia were to shift in an enduring way.
Members considered whether it was necessary to wait for March quarter data on the Wage Price Index andbroader measures of wages growth from the national accounts to be published. They agreed that thisinformation would be helpful; however, the recent evidence on wages growth from the Bank's liaisonand business surveys was clear.
Members agreed that the condition the Board had set to increase the cash rate had been met. They alsoagreed that further increases in interest rates would likely be required to ensure that inflation inAustralia returns to the target over time. In making its decisions, the Board agreed that it willcontinue to be guided by the evidence on both inflation and the labour market, while noting thatsignificant uncertainties remain.
Globally, it was not yet clear how the various supply-side problems will be resolved. Domestically, therewas uncertainty about how household spending would respond to the erosion of real wages, as wages havenot kept pace with consumer prices. There is no contemporary experience as to how labour costs and pricesin Australia would behave at an unemployment rate below 4 per cent. Members also considered howhouseholds would respond to rising interest rates, given the high level of household debt and thesignificant increases in financial buffers over the preceding couple of years. The Board will continue tomonitor these and other issues closely as it determines the timing and extent of future interest rateincreases.
Members considered three options for the size of the rate increase at the present meeting – raisingthe cash rate by 15 basis points, 25 basis points or 40 basis points. Members agreed thatraising the cash rate by 15 basis points was not the preferred option given that policy was verystimulatory and that it was highly probable that further rate rises would be required. A 15 basispoint increase would also be inconsistent with the historical practice of changing the cash rate inincrements of at least 25 basis points. An argument for an increase of 40 basis points could bemade given the upside risks to inflation and the current very low level of interest rates. However, members agreed that the preferred option was 25 basis points. A move of this size would help signalthat the Board was now returning to normal operating procedures after the extraordinary period of thepandemic. Given that the Board meets monthly, it would have the opportunity to review the setting ofinterest rates again within a relatively short period of time, based on additional information.
Members also discussed the reinvestment strategy for bond maturities of the stock of bonds purchased bythe Bank during the pandemic. Although only a small value of government bonds held by the Bank would bematuring in 2022, the value of maturing bonds held by the Bank would start to rise with the April 2023bond maturity.
One option was to reinvest bonds as they matured, which would maintain the stimulus associated with thestock of bonds held by the Bank, but would be inconsistent with the strength of the economy and the highlevel of inflation. By contrast, the option of not reinvesting bonds as they matured would mean thestimulus associated with bond purchases would be removed gradually and predictably. Members also notedthat, while selling bonds would remove the stimulus provided by the Bank's balance sheet morequickly, that effect would be modest compared with the effect of increases in the cash rate. Moreover, the Bank's balance sheet would start to diminish quite quickly in 2023 as a significant share of theTerm Funding Facility would roll off by September 2023, and the remainder would roll off by June 2024.
The Board decided that it would not reinvest the proceeds of maturing government bonds, consistent withthe decision to start withdrawing from extraordinary monetary policy settings. However, the Board did notcurrently plan for the Bank to sell the government bonds it had purchased during the pandemic and itintended to allow the portfolio to run down in a predictable way as bonds mature. While contributing tothe withdrawal of monetary stimulus, this would also recognise that the cash rate remains the primarytool for achieving the desired stance of monetary policy.
Members noted that in some years' time, after the Bank's balance sheet had reduced further, theBoard would need to consider the broader issue of the longer-term optimal size and composition of thebalance sheet, including the size of Exchange Settlement balances. In this context, it might consider theuse of longer-term bond holdings, although this would be driven by the appropriate operating framework inlight of evolving conditions and would not have implications for, or have a bearing on, the stance ofmonetary policy.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 35 basis points and toincrease the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances from zero per cent to 25 basispoints.
The Board decided that the Bank would not reinvest the proceeds of maturing government bonds that it hadpurchased during the pandemic and had no current plans for the Bank to sell these bonds.