Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 3 September 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department), David Jacobs (Deputy Head, International Marketsand Relations, International Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that business conditions in themanufacturing sectors in many economies had remained subdued. They discussed the escalation of theUS–China trade and technology disputes, which had intensified the downside risks to the globaloutlook. By contrast, conditions in more domestically focused sectors had generally continued to beresilient, supported by ongoing strength in labour markets. Employment growth had remained robust in themajor advanced economies, although it had eased a little in some economies in recent months, andunemployment rates had remained low. Although wages growth had picked up, year-ended inflation hadremained below target in the major advanced economies. Members noted that inflation in the United Stateshad increased in recent months.
The main development over the previous month had been the escalation of the US–China trade andtechnology disputes. The United States had announced higher tariffs on most imports from China, including consumer goods that had not previously been subject to the tariff increases, to take effectover the remainder of 2019. Members noted that recent and prospective increases in tariffs couldincrease consumer price inflation in the United States by between ¼ and ½ percentagepoint over the following few years, based on a range of published estimates. In response to the USannouncements, China had suspended purchases of US agricultural products and had announced plans toincrease tariffs on around one-half of the value of US imports. In value terms, US exports to Chinahad contracted by around 20 per cent over the year to June, while US imports from Chinahad been around 3 per cent lower. Members also noted that some other east Asian economies werebenefiting from the diversion of US imports away from China.
More generally, global trade volumes had fallen over the previous year, reflecting both the escalationof trade tensions and slower growth in Chinese domestic demand. Weak external demand had been reflectedin slowing growth in global industrial production and below-average conditions in the globalmanufacturing sector. Recent indicators suggested trade-related activity would remain weak for sometime.
Members noted that weak external demand and heightened geopolitical uncertainty had contributed tolower growth in business investment in many economies, including the United States, the euro area andthe United Kingdom. These economies had also recorded declines in investment intentions. By contrast, inthe United States the household sector had been resilient, but overall GDP growth had slowed in the Junequarter. GDP growth had also slowed in most euro area countries in the June quarter; Germany hadrecorded a small contraction in GDP. By contrast, GDP growth in Japan had been moderate, supported byconsumption brought forward ahead of a scheduled increase in the consumption tax in October, as well asongoing growth in investment, bolstered by the need to address labour shortages.
Recent data suggested that growth in China had eased further. Most indicators of economic activity hadslowed in July, including in components being supported by recent policy measures, such asinfrastructure investment. The level of steel production had declined slightly. Retail sales growth hadresumed its downward trend, after having received a boost from strong growth in car sales in recentmonths ahead of tighter emission standards coming into effect. In India, recent indicators had alsopointed to output growth slowing.
Weak global trade had continued to weigh on growth in east Asia. Trade within the region and with Chinahad contracted further in June. Growth in industrial production and survey measures of manufacturingconditions had remained weak. Political unrest had weighed on economic conditions for businesses andhouseholds in Hong Kong, while an ongoing dispute with Japan had disrupted South Korean production ofelectronics. However, domestic demand elsewhere in the region had held up, supported by governmentpolicies in some cases.
Iron ore prices had declined since the previous meeting, but were around 40 per cent higherthan a year earlier. Market reports had attributed these declines to a number of factors, includingconcerns about the outlook for steel demand in China following the escalation of the disputes betweenthe United States and China in early August, lower steel prices and an easing in supply concerns. Theprices of coal and rural commodities had been somewhat lower over the prior month, while oil and basemetals prices had been little changed, except where there had been disruptions to the supply of specificmetals.
Domestic Economic Conditions
The main information on the domestic economy received since the previous meeting had been on the labourmarket as well as partial indicators of output growth in the June quarter in the lead-up to thepublication of the national accounts. Quarterly GDP growth was expected to be around½ per cent, supported by a strong recovery in resource exports from earlier supplydisruptions.
The ABS capital expenditure (Capex) survey suggested that mining investment had grown in the Junequarter, driven by an increase in machinery & equipment investment. The Capex survey suggested therehad also been an increase in machinery & equipment investment by the non-mining sector in the Junequarter, while non-residential construction was expected to have declined. Investment intentions for2019/20 had been positive for the mining sector, but had been modestlylower for the non-mining sector. Members noted that the outlook for the construction sector wasparticularly weak.
Members recognised that, overall, Australian businesses had not appeared to have been affected by theweak trade environment to the same extent as businesses in other advanced economies. This was partlybecause Australia's exports are more exposed to Chinese domestic demand and less integrated inglobal supply chains.
Consumption growth was expected to have remained low in the June quarter. Retail sales volumes had beenweak in the June quarter and the value of retail sales had fallen in July. The low- and middle-incometax offset (LMITO) was expected to boost household income, and thus support consumption growth, incoming quarters. However, the Bank's liaison with retailers suggested that this had yet to liftspending noticeably. Members noted that even if the LMITO was used to pay off debts, this would stillbring forward the point at which households could increase their spending.
Established housing market conditions had steadied in recent months. Reported housing prices in Sydneyand Melbourne had risen noticeably in August and auction clearance rates had increased further, althoughvolumes had remained low. Housing market conditions had been subdued elsewhere, although there weresigns of housing prices stabilising in Brisbane. Housing turnover had remained low. Consequently, spending on home furnishings and other housing-related items was not expected to contribute toconsumption growth in the near term. Indicators suggested that dwelling investment had declined furtherin the June quarter and indicators of earlier stages of residential building activity had remained weak;building approvals had declined further in June and other measures of early-stage activity and buyerinterest had remained at low levels.
Employment growth had remained strong in July, but the unemployment rate had remained at5.2 per cent. Employment growth over preceding months had been broadly based across states andhad predominantly been in full-time work. Strong employment growth had been accompanied by a furtherincrease in the participation rate, which had recorded another all-time high. Members noted that theincrease in participation had been particularly notable for New South Wales. Forward-looking indicatorshad continued to suggest that employment growth would moderate over the following six months.Information from liaison suggested employment intentions had remained weak in the residentialconstruction sector but positive among services firms.
Wages growth had remained low and the upward trend in wages growth appeared to have stalled. The wageprice index had increased by 2.3 per cent over the year to the June quarter. Private sectorwages growth had been unchanged in the quarter, while public sector wages growth had been a littlehigher. Most of this increase had been the result of a one-off adjustment to equalise the wages ofnurses and midwives in Victoria with those in New South Wales.
Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of financial markets by noting that government bond yields haddeclined and were at record lows in many countries, including Australia. Volatility and risk premiums inglobal financial markets had increased in August, following the escalation of the disputes between theUnited States and China and disappointing economic data releases in Germany and China. The persistentdownside risks to the global economy, combined with subdued inflation, had led a number of central banksto reduce interest rates in recent months and further monetary easing was widely expected.
In the United States, market pricing implied that the federal funds rate was expected to decline byaround 100 basis points over the following year. Market participants also expected the EuropeanCentral Bank to provide additional monetary stimulus in the near term, including renewed asset purchasesand a reduction in its policy rate further into negative territory. Central banks in a number of otheradvanced economies had also eased policy, or signalled that they were prepared to do so, in response tosubdued inflation, moderating activity and downside risks to growth. For similar reasons, central banksin emerging markets had also been easing policy over recent months and had signalled the possibility offurther easing.
Financial conditions for corporations remained accommodative globally. This reflected marketparticipants' ongoing expectations that central banks were likely to deliver further monetaryeasing to sustain the global economic expansion. Corporate bond spreads had increased a little inAugust, but remained low. Equity prices had declined somewhat, reflecting concerns about the outlook forgrowth, but remained substantially higher over the year to date. In Australia, equity prices were5 per cent below the record high reached in late July. Australian listed companies'profits had risen, driven by the resources sector. At the aggregate level, companies had increased theirdividends over the preceding year, although this reflected higher dividends in the resources sector inparticular.
In China, the authorities had intervened to support three small banks in preceding months, and thePeople's Bank of China had continued to maintain a high level of liquidity in the banking system.While funding conditions for smaller banks had tightened this year, money market rates and corporate andgovernment bond yields in China had generally remained low and market participants were expectingfurther easing in monetary policy in the period ahead.
In foreign exchange markets, the Chinese renminbi had depreciated against the US dollar in Augustfollowing the escalation of the US–China disputes, while the Japanese yen had appreciated overthe month. The Australian dollar had been little changed at around its lowest level in some years.
In Australia, borrowing rates for both businesses and households were at historically low levels, aswere banks' funding costs. Variable mortgage rates had declined broadly in line with the reductionsin the cash rate in June and July. Fixed mortgage rates had also declined substantially over thepreceding six months. Financial market pricing continued to imply that the cash rate was expected to belowered by another 25 basis points by November 2019, with a further cut expected in the early partof 2020.
Growth in housing credit had been little changed over the year to July, having declined steadilythrough 2018. Credit to investors had declined slightly over previous months. Meanwhile, housing loanapprovals to both owner-occupiers and investors had increased for the second consecutive month in July.This pick-up in loan approvals had followed a significant decline over the preceding two years and wasconsistent with the signs of stabilisation in the established housing market. Borrowing by largebusinesses had continued to grow at a relatively strong pace. In contrast, small businesses' accessto finance remained difficult, and had become more difficult over the preceding year as banks hadtightened their lending practices. While new sources of non-traditional finance had been growing, including equity funding from family offices and private equity funds, they remained a small share ofbusiness funding.
Members had a detailed discussion of the ways in which financial conditions abroad affect Australia.They discussed how shifts in world interest rates and global risk premiums flow through to domesticfinancial conditions. While Australia's floating exchange rate means that monetary policy can beset largely according to domestic considerations, members discussed the large shifts insavings/investment decisions globally, which were affecting the level of interest rates everywhere, including in Australia. Members also noted the critical role that the exchange rate had played over manyyears as a shock absorber for the Australian economy. One important factor here has been that Australianentities raising offshore funding are able to do so in Australian dollars, either directly or viahedging markets.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
Turning to the policy decision, members observed that the news on the international economy hadconfirmed that the risks to the global growth outlook were to the downside. The trade disputes betweenthe United States and China had escalated and growth in China had continued to slow. There had beenfurther indications that these developments were affecting trade and investment decisions in overseaseconomies, although businesses had continued hiring and labour market conditions had remainedtight.
Against this backdrop and with ongoing low inflation, a number of central banks had reduced interestrates over recent months and further monetary easing was widely expected. Long-term government bondyields had declined and were at record lows in many countries, including Australia. Borrowing rates forboth businesses and households were also at historically low levels, and the Australian dollar exchangerate was at the lowest level that it had been in recent times.
Domestically, members considered a number of developments over preceding months that had a bearing onthe monetary policy decision. First, employment had continued to grow strongly and the participationrate was at a record high. However, the unemployment rate had remained steady at around5.2 per cent over recent months. At the same time, wages growth had remained low and therewere few indications that wage pressures were building. Members noted that a further gradual lift inwages growth would be a welcome development. Taken together, recent outcomes suggested that sparecapacity remained in the labour market and that the Australian economy could sustain lower rates ofunemployment and underemployment.
Second, there had been further signs of a turnaround in established housing markets, especially inSydney and Melbourne, although housing turnover had remained low. Housing credit growth had remainedsubdued, although mortgage rates were at record low levels and there was strong competition forborrowers of high credit quality. Data on residential building approvals and information from theBank's liaison program suggested that there was likely to be further weakness in dwellinginvestment in the near term; members recognised that this could sow the seeds of an upswing in thehousing price cycle at some point, particularly given the lengthy stages in the construction ofhigher-density residential housing. Demand for credit by investors continued to be subdued and creditconditions, especially for small and medium-sized businesses, remained tight.
Finally, based on partial indicators, GDP growth in the June quarter was expected to have been around½ per cent. The largest contributions to growth were expected to have been from exportsand public demand. Private final demand, which includes consumption, business investment and dwellinginvestment, was expected to have been weak.
Looking forward, the outlook for output growth was being supported by the low level of interest rates, recent tax cuts, signs of stabilisation in some established housing markets and a brighter outlook forthe resources sector. A key uncertainty continued to be the outlook for consumption growth, which wasexpected to increase over time, supported by a gradual pick-up in growth in household disposable incomeand improvements in conditions in the housing market. Inflation pressures remained subdued, butinflation was expected to increase gradually to be a little above 2 per cent over 2021 asoutput growth picked up and the labour market tightened.
Based on the information available, members judged that it was reasonable to expect that an extendedperiod of low interest rates would be required in Australia to make sustained progress towards fullemployment and achieve more assured progress towards the inflation target. Members would assessdevelopments in both the international and domestic economies, including labour market conditions, andwould ease monetary policy further if needed to support sustainable growth in the economy and theachievement of the inflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 1.00 per cent.