Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 4 August 2020
Members Participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment)
International Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that new COVID-19 cases hadincreased significantly over the preceding month. Case numbers were high in the United States and inseveral large emerging market economies. Some countries that had brought case numbers down to lowlevels, such as Japan and Australia, had experienced fresh outbreaks in July. In South Korea and much ofEurope there had been more success in suppressing the virus after restrictions on activity had beenlifted. Activity had picked up over the preceding few months, but signs of a reversal in mobilityindicators were emerging in some countries, particularly those with rising infection rates. Membersnoted that the global economy was likely to take longer to recover than initially thought and that thedamage to labour markets could linger.
The global downturn in the first half of 2020 was more severe and widespread than had been seen formany decades. The extent of the contraction in each economy depended largely on the timing and scale oflockdowns and other health-related restrictions on activity. The contraction in activity in the Marchquarter in advanced economies was not quite as large as had been feared, other than for some euro areaeconomies. In the United States and Germany, GDP growth had contracted by around 10 per centin the June quarter, while countries that had successfully implemented targeted measures, such as SouthKorea, had experienced smaller contractions in activity over the same period.
Members observed that business conditions in several large economies had improved in June and that thisseemed to have extended into July. Surveyed conditions in the services sector, which had been very badlyaffected during the lockdowns, had rebounded particularly strongly. Another feature of the recovery inadvanced economies had been the sharp increases in retail sales. Households had resumed spending, insome cases quite rapidly, after the end of restrictions. Household income support had contributed tothis. By contrast, industrial production had been much slower to recover. The more subdued recovery inindustrial production may have reflected a combination of lower expectations about future demand as wellas supply chain disruptions.
Labour markets everywhere had been severely affected by the pandemic. Unemployment had risen and hoursworked had declined. Some countries, such as the United States and Canada, had initially seen very largedeclines in the employment-to-population ratio, which partly reflected workers who had been temporarilystood down being counted as unemployed.
Members noted that the Chinese economy had recovered strongly, and by more than generally expected, inthe June quarter. Steel-intensive sectors were generating levels of output around or above pre-outbreaklevels, which was supporting Australia's exports of bulk commodities. Fiscal and monetary policyeasing in China had also been supporting the recovery. In contrast with advanced economies, consumerspending in China had been slower to recover than industrial production. This may have partly reflectedthe different emphasis of fiscal policy support measures in China, which had been aimed more directly atbusinesses and less at households compared with advanced economies. However, it was noted that weakglobal demand could hamper the recovery in export-oriented manufacturing, both in China and elsewhere ineast Asia.
In India, a partial recovery in employment had been evident in migrant workers returning to their homevillages and obtaining work in the government's rural work guarantee programs. However, therecovery in mobility indicators had slowed recently.
More generally, members noted that a key lesson from the recent international experience is that manypeople voluntarily restrict their movement if they are concerned about the coronavirus, even in theabsence of physical distancing restrictions.
In summarising the international outlook, members noted that the GDP of Australia's major tradingpartners was expected to contract by around 3 per cent in 2020, before rising by around6 per cent in 2021, leaving GDP below where it would have been had the outbreak not occurred.Nevertheless, members agreed that the outlook was highly uncertain, and that the shape of the recoverydepended on containment of the virus.
Domestic Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion by noting that the economic downturn in Australia over the firsthalf of 2020 was the most severe in many decades: staff estimates suggested a decline in GDP of around7 per cent and a contraction in hours worked of around 10 per cent. Though verylarge, the downturn in the first half of the year had been smaller than predicted a few months earlierbecause restrictions had been less onerous and had been lifted earlier than expected. This had allowedan economic recovery to commence in May. Unprecedented fiscal and monetary support had also played a keyrole.
Members agreed that the lengthening and tightening of restrictions in Melbourne, and the extension ofrestrictions to regional Victoria, was a setback to the recovery and would weigh on overall domesticactivity in the September quarter. In addition to the direct effects of the lockdown, there were likelyto be negative effects on the confidence of households and businesses. General uncertainty was noted asaffecting demand more broadly, beyond the industries or states most affected by the earlier restrictionson activity. Mobility indicators suggested that the previous recovery in activity had slowed across thecountry, including beyond Melbourne.
Members considered three scenarios for the economic outlook, given the high degree of uncertainty. Thebaseline scenario assumed that the Stage 4 restrictions in Victoria were not materially extendedand that Australia's international borders remained closed until mid 2021. In this scenario, the recovery over the second half of 2020 was forecast to be more gradual than envisaged three monthsearlier. This was partly because of the reinstated lockdown in Melbourne, and partly because uncertaintyhad been affecting demand beyond the industries most affected by the Stage 3 restrictions onactivity. In this scenario, output was expected to recover somewhat over the second half of the year, bringing the contraction over 2020 to 6 per cent. Output was then expected to expand by5 per cent over 2021 and 4 per cent over 2022. These projections indicated that, bythe end of the forecast period, GDP was expected to remain short of the level forecast before thepandemic.
The two other scenarios – an upside and a downside scenario – differed primarily in termsof assumptions over the evolution of the coronavirus. The upside scenario embodied a stronger and fasterrecovery on the basis of rapid progress in containing the virus in Australia, with no further extensionto the Melbourne lockdown and progressive easing of restrictions nationwide after that. In thisscenario, the faster pace of recovery was driven by restored confidence, which would encourage strongerconsumption and the recent run-up in savings being unwound at a faster pace than assumed in the baselinescenario. Much of the near-term decline in GDP would reverse over 2020-21 as consumption growthrebounded strongly in this scenario.
The downside scenario assumed a globally widespread resurgence in infections in the near term and thatAustralia was faced with periodic outbreaks and ‘rolling’ lockdowns. In this scenario, consumption would fall further over the second half of 2020, despite ongoing policy support. With borderrestrictions remaining in place until the end of 2021, the recovery in services exports would bedelayed. As a result, GDP would not recover over the second half of 2020 and the subsequent recoverywould be slower, partly because of the damage to confidence (in addition to the direct effects of morelockdowns). This would affect consumption and investment even after restrictions were lifted. Membersnoted that the downside scenario entailed a much larger deviation in output from the baseline comparedwith the upside scenario, reflecting that the risks around the outlook were to the downside.
In their discussion of the forecasts, members noted that in previous downturns it had been quiteunusual for consumption to decline significantly, as had been the case in this episode. Despite that, inthe present episode consumption by households was likely to have rebounded sooner and by more thanexpected a few months earlier. This was partly because restrictions on activity had been lifted fasterthan previously anticipated, which translated into a decline in hours worked that was less severe thanexpected. But it also reflected the substantial policy support for household income, which, unusuallyfor a downturn, had seen incomes for some households rise noticeably. Household cash flow had also beenbolstered by the significant volume of superannuation withdrawals. As a result, with income holding upand consumption having declined sharply early in the June quarter, the household saving ratio wasestimated to have increased substantially.
The extension of government policy support would continue to support household incomes and assist therecovery over the following few quarters. While household income was expected to decline for a periodwhen this support was tapered, consumption would continue to be supported by higher savings, which wouldassist in smoothing consumption through temporary dips in income in the period ahead.
In considering the substantial amount of fiscal policy support, members noted that around30 per cent of Australia's working-age population was receiving JobKeeper, JobSeeker oran equivalent payment. The JobKeeper program had been extended to March 2021, with tighter eligibilityrequirements and lower, tiered payments for full-time and part-time workers. The Coronavirus Supplement, paid to JobSeeker recipients, had also been extended at a lower rate from September. Combined with othermeasures and the usual automatic stabilisers, the net positive fiscal impact from the expected change inAustralian Government finances was equivalent to around 4 per cent of GDP in 2019/20 and a further 5 per cent in 2020/21. State governments had also provided some support, mostly in the form ofincreased funding for public services and relief from taxes and fees.
In turning to housing activity, members noted that prices in the established housing market haddeclined moderately in Sydney, Perth and Brisbane, and a little more in Melbourne. New property listingshad recovered to around similar levels in the previous year; however, the reimposition of restrictionsin Melbourne was limiting sales there and would continue to do so. New housing sales were more buoyant, supported in part by the national HomeBuilder program and, in the case of Western Australia, substantialstate grants for new dwelling construction. By contrast, rental markets remained particularly weakacross the country. This was partly a result of lower demand and the boost to supply from propertiesthat were previously rented to international visitors.
Information from liaison with businesses and recent surveys indicated that the weakness in non-miningbusiness investment over recent quarters would become more pronounced in the period ahead. Investment inmachinery and equipment was expected to have been particularly weak in recent months given itsdiscretionary nature. Business liaison had reported that firms were prioritising their liquiditypositions in response to uncertainty about future demand. Many non-residential building projects thathad not yet commenced were on hold in part because of the uncertainty about future demand for suchspace. Work on projects that had already commenced was also expected to fall in the near term because oflimits on worker numbers at construction sites in Melbourne. Mining investment was expected to increasein the near term, but then ease as some projects were deferred.
With international borders expected to remain closed for six months longer than assumed in May, theoutlook for services exports had been revised down. The profile for education exports was relativelyflat, and other travel-related services exports were not expected to recover until later in 2021; eventhen, they would do so only gradually. The outlook for other exports had been revised a little lowercompared with the forecast in May, reflecting weak global demand, heightened restrictions in Melbourneand the recent exchange rate appreciation. The main exception was rural exports, which had been reviseda little higher because of favourable weather. Imports had also been revised lower, reflecting in partthe effect on outbound tourism of longer border closures.
Turning to the labour market, employment had been recovering since May, but weekly payroll data showedthat there was a loss of momentum in late June and the first half of July. This was most evident inVictoria, but could also be seen across the other states. Members noted that female workers had beenaffected disproportionately in the early phase of the contraction. This pattern reflected industryemployment trends, where female workers were disproportionately represented in industries most affectedin the early phase of the restrictions. However, male workers had been more heavily represented inindustries that had shed jobs in the recent period.
Members noted that the contraction in hours worked had been less severe than initially thought.However, relative to earlier expectations, more of the fall in hours worked had reflected job lossesrather than people working reduced hours. This was despite one in ten workers continuing to be employedon reduced hours and a large number of full-time workers continuing to be stood down on zero hours. Thissuggested that the contraction in activity and employment was the result of expected weakness in demandand general uncertainty, in addition to restrictions on activity. It also indicated the recovery inemployment would be slower than earlier assumed.
More broadly, significant spare capacity in the labour market was constraining wages growth; ahead ofthe pandemic, wages growth had been around 2 per cent. Information from the Bank'sliaison program indicated that the share of contacts expecting to freeze wages or to implement temporarywage cuts was higher than in the past.
In the baseline scenario, the unemployment rate, which had risen from just over 5 per centbefore the pandemic to 7.4 per cent in June, was expected to rise to around10 per cent in late 2020 before declining gradually to around 7 per cent in 2022.The upward trajectory for the unemployment rate reflected moderate employment losses in the second halfof 2020 and an increase in the number of people re-joining the labour force. This followed a periodearlier in the year when an unusually large number of people who lost employment had left the labourforce altogether. An increase in labour force participation, which would translate into a higherunemployment rate, was expected to result partly from JobSeeker recipients again having to undertake jobsearch activities to qualify for the payment and partly from the progressive lifting of restrictionsenabling more people to search for work. In considering other possible paths for the unemployment rate, members noted that the upside scenario could result in a slightly lower peak in the unemployment rate, and a faster subsequent decline, falling to around 6 per cent by the end of 2022.Alternatively, in the downside scenario, the unemployment rate would be expected to peak at around10½ per cent, and decline very gradually to around 9 per cent by the end of theforecast period.
In turning to the discussion on recent inflation developments, members noted that the2 per cent decline in headline CPI in the June quarter reflected unusually large declines in anumber of components, including child care and pre-school fees, petrol prices and rents, and the effectof rebates on some administered items. In underlying terms, the severe contraction in economic activityin the June quarter had resulted in disinflationary pressures, although prices of certain grocery andhousehold items had risen because of strong demand and constraints on supply. Around9 per cent of the CPI basket was not available to have prices measured for at least some ofthe quarter, necessitating the use of imputed prices. Members noted that the June quarter outcomes forchild care and pre-school fees, and fuel prices, would be largely reversed in the September quarter.However, the weakness observed in rents in the June quarter was expected to persist over the forecastperiod, given the slowdown in population growth because of lower migration.
In discussing the outlook for inflation, members noted that significant spare capacity, highunemployment and slow wages growth would contribute to a prolonged period of low inflation. Thepossibility that supply disruptions could lessen disinflationary pressures was considered, but weaknessin demand was expected to be the dominant factor affecting inflation outcomes in the period ahead.Underlying inflation was forecast to remain below 2 per cent over the forecast period in eachof the scenarios considered. In the baseline scenario, underlying inflation was expected to reach atrough of around 1 per cent late in 2021 and to be around 1½ per cent by end2022. In the upside scenario, a more rapid tightening in the labour market was expected to contribute toinflation reaching around 1¾ per cent by the end of 2022. In the downside scenario, wherethe unemployment rate remained at elevated levels over the forecast period, inflation was expected totrough at around ½ per cent and increase only a little by the end of 2022. But theoverall message from the scenario analysis was that underlying inflationary pressures would remainsubdued for a considerable period.
International Financial Markets
Members noted that global financial conditions had remained accommodative. Central banks in theadvanced economies had mostly left their policy settings unchanged and had continued to signal that theywould maintain highly accommodative monetary policies for some time. Central banks' asset purchaseprograms had contributed to the accommodative financial conditions, with market functioning having beenlargely restored. These purchases had assisted bond markets to absorb the significant increase insovereign debt issuance associated with the expansion in fiscal policy, thereby helping to keepgovernment bond yields around historic lows. Spreads between the yields of euro area periphery bonds andGerman Bunds had declined following the announcement of a €750 billion package of loans andgrants designed to support the recovery in Europe.
Over the preceding month, the Bank of Canada had committed to maintaining its policy rate at theeffective lower bound until spare capacity had been absorbed and the inflation target had beensustainably achieved. The US Federal Reserve had extended the duration of various lendingfacilities.
The costs of raising corporate debt had remained low. Corporate debt issuance had eased in July, fromthe record high levels in preceding months. Equity market prices had risen further and had recoveredmuch of their sharp falls from earlier in the year, supported by optimism around the development of aCOVID-19 vaccine and a general expectation that the decline in earnings recorded in the first halfof the year would be relatively short-lived. Members noted that the relative strength of US equityprices could be explained partly by the large weight in market indexes of tech-related stocks, which hadbenefited from an increase in demand for digital services and online shopping. By contrast, low oilprices had contributed to the underperformance of energy stocks. In Australia, equity prices hadrecovered around half of their decline earlier in the year.
Financial conditions in emerging markets had improved a little over the prior month. Low and stableinflation had allowed for a further easing in monetary policies. Also, capital flows had mostlystabilised, following significant portfolio outflows earlier in the year. Indeed, currency interventionoperations had been scaled back and exchange rates had generally stabilised, although at lower levelsthan before the outbreak of the pandemic. Members noted that many emerging market economies in Asia hadperformed well compared with other emerging market economies because they had faced the onset of thepandemic with stronger economic fundamentals.
In China, better-than-expected domestic economic data had contributed to a strong increase in equityprices early in July, while money market conditions had tightened, consistent with the improved economicsituation and the authorities' desire to limit the build-up of risks in parts of the financialsystem. While this had led to a broader increase in borrowing rates, financial conditions had generallyremained accommodative and broad measures of financing were growing at a slightly faster rate than in2019, as intended.
Members noted that there had been a broad-based depreciation of the US dollar, and that thecurrencies of other advanced economies had returned to levels seen earlier in the year. The euro hadappreciated to its highest level in several years, supported by the recent agreement on a European Unionrecovery fund. The Australian dollar had also appreciated against the US dollar to be a littleabove where it had started the year. The Australian dollar had been broadly in line with its fundamentaldeterminants, such as commodity prices and interest rate differentials, which had returned to theirlevels at the start of the year. Despite further tensions between China and the United States, theChinese renminbi had remained stable.
Domestic Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of domestic financial markets by noting that government bond marketshad continued to function normally alongside a significant increase in issuance. The yield on 10-yearAustralian Government Securities (AGS) had remained low. While the yield on 3-year AGS had remainedconsistent with the target, it had been a little higher than 25 basis points over the precedingweeks. Members supported the Bank purchasing AGS in the secondary market to ensure that the yield on the3-year bond remained consistent with the target. Conditions in markets for bonds issued by the state andterritory borrowing authorities (semis) had normalised in recent months.
Activity in the cash market had remained low, reflecting sizeable Exchange Settlement balances, and thecash rate had remained around 13 basis points. Other money market rates had also remained low.
Funding costs for banks had eased a little further to historic lows. Take-up of the Term FundingFacility (TFF) had increased as the end-September deadline for accessing initial allowances had drawncloser. Many banks had indicated that they would have taken up their initial allowance in full by thattime. Members noted that funding through the TFF was a less expensive option than issuing bonds. Thestock of bonds on issue by the major banks had declined, but remained substantial.
Interest rates for business loans had also fallen to historically low levels because banks had passedthrough the cash rate reductions and the effects of other policy measures to business borrowers.Nevertheless, business lending had contracted, following strong growth earlier in the year, as largebusinesses repaid credit they had earlier drawn down for precautionary reasons in response to thepandemic. Meanwhile, lending to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), many of which were operatingin the most affected sectors of the economy, had been little changed. Demand for new loans –especially from SMEs – had been low, reflecting the weak economic conditions and the unusuallyuncertain outlook, although the supply of credit also appeared to have tightened a little. Members notedthe importance of the JobKeeper program and other policy interventions for supporting SMEs through thecurrent difficult period.
Interest rates on housing loans had also declined to historic lows; over half of the decline in thecash rate in 2020 had flowed through to variable mortgage rates. Competition for high-quality borrowershad remained strong and rates on fixed-rate loans had declined to be noticeably lower than variablerates; a larger-than-usual share of borrowers had applied for fixed-rate loans. External refinancing hadrisen sharply, consistent with the very low level of interest rates and offers of cash back to borrowersfor refinancing an existing loan previously held with another lender. Commitments for refinancing hadrecently been almost as high as those for new loans. Banks had announced extensions to their loanpayment deferral schemes, but were encouraging borrowers to make repayments if they could afford to doso. The balance in offset and redraw accounts had risen noticeably in April and May, but borrowers hadwithdrawn some of these funds in June; even so, balances held in these accounts remained large and abovelevels in March.
Owner-occupier housing credit growth had slowed and investor housing credit had continued to decline, consistent with the earlier slowdown in housing market activity and the decline in loan commitmentssince March. While activity in the housing market and loan commitments had picked up in recent months, the flow of new commitments had remained well below its peak and was likely to remain subdued in theface of recent developments in Victoria and uncertainty about the economic recovery.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economy was experiencing a severedownturn as countries sought to contain the COVID-19 outbreak. Even though the worst of the globaleconomic contraction had passed, the outlook remained highly uncertain and would depend upon containmentof the coronavirus. Infection rates had declined in some countries, but were still very high and risingin other countries.
The Australian economy was going through a very difficult period and was experiencing the biggest shockto economic activity since the 1930s. A very large number of people had lost their jobs, with manyothers retaining their jobs over this period only because of government support programs. Nevertheless, members noted that the downturn had not been as severe as earlier expected and a recovery was under wayin most of Australia. The recovery was, however, likely to be slower than earlier expected, with theCOVID-19 outbreak in Victoria having a major impact on the economy. Uncertainty about the healthsituation and the future path of the economy was continuing to affect the spending plans of manyhouseholds and businesses.
Members agreed that the Bank's policy package was continuing to work broadly as expected. Thepackage had helped to lower funding costs and stabilise financial conditions, and was supporting theeconomy. There was a very high level of liquidity in the Australian financial system and authoriseddeposit-taking institutions were continuing to draw on the TFF, with further use expected oversubsequent months. Members noted that the Australian banking system, with its strong capital andliquidity buffers, remained resilient and was helping the economy traverse this difficult period.Government bond markets were operating effectively and the yield on 3-year Australian Government bondshad been consistent with the target of around 25 basis points. The yield had, however, been alittle higher than 25 basis points over the weeks preceding the meeting. Given this, the Bank wouldpurchase Australian Government bonds in the secondary market from 5 August 2020 as necessary toensure that the yield on 3-year bonds remains consistent with the target. It would also stand ready topurchase Australian Government bonds and semis in the event of a recurrence of market dysfunction.
Members reaffirmed that there was no need to adjust the package of measures in Australia in the currentenvironment. Members agreed, however, to continue to assess the evolving situation in Australia and didnot rule out adjusting the current package if circumstances warranted.
Board members recognised that the substantial, coordinated and unprecedented easing of fiscal andmonetary policy in Australia was helping to sustain the economy through this difficult period. Theywelcomed the Australian Government's recent announcement that various income support measures wouldbe extended, and considered it likely that fiscal and monetary support would be required for some timegiven the outlook for the economy and the labour market. The Board affirmed its commitment to supportingjobs, incomes and businesses and to making sure that Australia is well placed for recovery. The Boardconsidered that its actions were keeping funding costs low and supporting the supply of credit tohouseholds and businesses, and resolved that this accommodative approach would be maintained for as longas necessary.
The Decision
The Board reaffirmed the elements of the policy package announced on 19 March 2020, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.25 per centa target of 0.25 per cent for the yield on 3-year Australian Government bondsthe Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small and medium-sizedbusinessesan interest rate of 10 basis points on Exchange Settlement balances held by financialinstitutions at the Bank.
The Board affirmed that the yield target for 3-year bonds would be maintained until progress is madetowards the Bank's goals of full employment and the inflation target, and that it would beappropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rate itself is raised. The Board determined thatit would not increase the cash rate target until progress is made towards full employment and it isconfident that inflation will be sustainably within the 2-3 per cent target band.