Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 4 February 2020
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Members granted leave of absence to Allan Moss AO in terms of section 18A of the ReserveBank Act1959.
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Bradley Jones (Head, InternationalDepartment), Rochelle Guttmann (Acting Head of Section, Macroeconomic Modelling, EconomicAnalysisDepartment)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting the International MonetaryFund's forecast for global growth to pick up in 2020 and 2021. The easing in trade tensionsbetweenthe United States and China, and ongoing stimulus delivered by central banks, had supported amodestimprovement in the growth outlook for a number of economies. Global manufacturing and tradeindicators, notably export orders, had continued to show signs of stabilising in late 2019. Inflation hadremainedlow and below most central banks' targets. Members also discussed the coronavirus outbreak, whichwas a new source of uncertainty regarding the global outlook.
In China, a range of activity indicators had picked up in the December quarter, which suggestedthattargeted fiscal and monetary easing had been working to stabilise economic conditions. In eastAsia, thegrowth outlook had been supported by signs of a turnaround in the global electronics cycle andmorestimulatory fiscal and monetary policies in some economies in the region. On the other hand, theoutlookfor output growth in India had been revised lower given the broad-based slowing in economicactivitythere.
In major advanced economies, indicators for manufacturing and services activity had ticked upslightlyand tight labour markets had supported growth in consumption. In the United States, lowerinterest rateshad supported a pick-up in residential investment. Business investment intentions hadstabilised.Japanese economic activity had slowed as expected following the increase in the consumption taxinOctober 2019, but the fiscal stimulus that had been announced was expected to support growth. Intheeuro area, survey indicators of conditions in the manufacturing sector appeared to have bottomedout, but investment had remained weak.
The progress in addressing the US–China trade and technology disputes had alleviated animportant downside risk to global growth. However, given the nature of the ‘phase one’deal and the potential for tensions to re-escalate, this risk had not been eliminated.
Members discussed the coronavirus outbreak, noting that it was a new source of uncertainty fortheglobal economy. With the situation still evolving, members observed that it was too early todeterminethe extent to which growth in China would be affected or the nature of the internationalspillovers. Itwas noted that previous outbreaks of new viruses had had significant but short-lived negativeeffects oneconomic growth in the economies at the centre of the outbreak. Members observed that it wasdifficultto know how representative these earlier episodes could be. China now accounted for a muchlarger shareof the global economy and was more closely integrated, including with Australia, than in 2003 atthetime of the SARS outbreak. The economic effects would depend crucially on the persistence of theoutbreak and measures taken to contain its spread.
Some commodity prices, notably for industrial metals, iron ore and oil, had fallen on concernsthat thecoronavirus outbreak would disrupt production in China and reduce Chinese commodity demand inthe nearterm. By contrast, rural prices had been little changed.
Domestic Economic Conditions
The Australian economy had grown modestly in the September quarter. While growth in public demandandexports had been relatively strong, growth in household spending and investment had remainedweak. Theoutput of the farm sector had also subtracted from growth over the preceding year, reflectingtheeffects of ongoing drought conditions. Members noted that the recent bushfires had devastatedsomeregional communities and that this was expected to have reduced GDP growth over the December andMarchquarters. The effects of the coronavirus outbreak were also expected to subtract from growth inexportsover the first half of 2020.
Overall, economic growth was expected to be weaker in the near term than had been forecast threemonthsearlier, partly because of the effects of the bushfires and the coronavirus outbreak. However, GDPgrowth was still expected to pick up over the forecast period, supported by accommodativemonetarypolicy, a pick-up in mining investment, and recoveries in dwelling investment and consumption.Therecovery from the bushfires was expected to add to growth in the second half of 2020. Thecentralforecast for growth remained unchanged since November, at 2¾ per cent over 2020andaround 3 per cent over 2021.
An increase in mining investment was expected in the near term and a turnaround in dwellinginvestment wasexpected by the end of 2020. However, the recovery in consumption was lesscertainand more consequential for overall demand. There was also uncertainty around estimates of theeffects ofthe bushfires and the coronavirus outbreak: it was difficult to assess potential indirecteffects onactivity from these events and relevant data were yet to be published.
Household consumption had been lower than expected in the September quarter despite strong growthinhousehold disposable income, supported by the receipt of tax offset payments and lower interestpaymentsfollowing the recent reductions in the cash rate. Information from the ABS retail sales releaseand theBank's liaison program had suggested that retail sales volumes were likely to have grownonlymodestly in the December quarter; although nominal retail sales had increased strongly in themonth ofNovember, much of this increase was likely to have been purchases brought forward to takeadvantage of‘Black Friday’ sales. Measures of consumer sentiment had declined over recentmonths, butconsumers' views on their personal financial situation, which historically have had astronger linkto consumption, had been little changed.
Members noted that a number of factors had contributed to the slowdown in consumption growthsincemid 2018. The downturn in the housing market had reduced households' wealth, and theextendedperiod of weak growth in household income had probably lowered expectations of future incomegrowth.Members observed that the prolonged period of slow growth in income was expected to continue toweigh onconsumption over coming quarters. Furthermore, recent data had suggested that households weredirectingmore income to saving and reducing their debt.
Looking ahead, the Bank's forecast was for growth in consumption to increase gradually, sustainedby moderate growth in household disposable income and the recovery in the housing market. Growthinhousing prices had picked up in most capital cities and parts of regional Australia over recentmonths.Prices had increased very strongly in Sydney and Melbourne in recent months. Higher housingprices andthe associated increase in housing turnover were expected to support consumption and dwellinginvestment.
Dwelling investment had continued to decline in the September quarter, however, and was expectedtodecline further in the near term. Nonetheless, leading indicators were consistent with theforecast of atrough in dwelling investment towards the end of 2020, followed by a recovery through 2021.Privateresidential building approvals had increased in the December quarter. Contacts in the Bank'sbusiness liaison program had reported an increase in sales of new homes and greenfield land inrecentmonths.
Business investment declined in the September quarter, with both mining and non-mining investmentweaker than expected as at November. Mining investment had been considerably lowerbecausework on new liquefied natural gas plants had continued to wind down. Information from businessliaisoncontacts and the recent ABS capital expenditure survey continued to support the view that mininginvestment was passing through a trough. Non-mining investment was expected to be subdued in thenearterm, but then to increase modestly, consistent with the expected pick-up in domestic activity.Publicinvestment had been stronger than expected in the September quarter and information fromgovernmentbudgets had suggested public spending would continue to support growth in the near term, includingthrough funding of initiatives for bushfire recovery and drought relief.
The unemployment rate had declined slightly to 5.1 per cent in December. Employmentgrowthhad moderated in the December quarter, but had remained at 2.1 per cent over the year.All thegrowth in the quarter had been in part-time employment. The Bank's forecast of employmentgrowthhad been revised downwards for the first half of 2020, reflecting the overall signal fromleadingindicators and the downward revision to forecast GDP growth in the near term. The unemploymentrate wasexpected to remain in the 5–5¼ per cent range for some time beforedeclining toaround 4¾ per cent in 2021, as GDP and employment growth picked up.
Members noted that the inflation data for the December quarter had been in line withexpectations.Headline CPI inflation had been 0.6 per cent in the quarter and 1.8 per centover2019. Trimmed mean inflation had been 0.4 per cent in the quarter and 1.6 per centover 2019. Housing inflation had continued to be a significant drag on overall inflation, with littlechange in rents both in the quarter and over the year. New dwelling prices had risen in theDecemberquarter following earlier declines because smaller discounts had been offered by developers.
Inflationary pressures were expected to remain subdued. Underlying and headline inflation wereexpectedto increase a little to around 2 per cent over the following couple of years as sparecapacityin the economy declined. Wages growth was expected to be largely unchanged over the followingcouple ofyears because mild upward pressure on growth in the wage price index would likely be offset bydownwardpressure from the increase in the superannuation guarantee from mid 2021.
Members noted that the risks around the wage and price inflation forecasts were evenly balanced.Wagesgrowth could pick up faster than expected if labour market conditions tightened by more thanexpected.The increase in the superannuation guarantee in 2021 was forecast to constrain wages growth forsomewage earners, although the timing and extent of this was uncertain and broader measures ofearningsgrowth could be expected to be boosted a little. Domestic inflationary pressures would depend ona rangeof factors, including how fast the economy recovered from the soft patch over the precedingyear, thepersistence of the effect of the drought on food prices, and developments in the housing market.
Financial Markets
Members noted that developments in global financial markets had reflected evolving perceptions ofkeyrisks.
Up until mid January, concerns over global downside risks had eased following stabilisation in arangeof forward-looking indicators of growth, the passage of the ‘phase one’ US–Chinatrade deal and improved prospects for an orderly Brexit. In response, long-term government bondyieldsand equity prices had risen. The US dollar and Japanese yen had depreciated a little, whiletheChinese renminbi had appreciated. There had also been renewed capital flows into emergingmarkets.
However, since then these moves in financial markets had been partly reversed as marketparticipantsbecame concerned about the potential effect of the coronavirus on the prospects for globaleconomicgrowth. In particular, government bond yields had declined noticeably to be back at very lowlevels. InAustralia, the 10-year government bond yield had declined in line with movements abroad, tobelow1 per cent. Also, the US dollar and Japanese yen had appreciated, while theChineserenminbi had depreciated. The Australian dollar had also depreciated to be around its lowestlevel since2009.
Overall, global financial conditions remained accommodative, in part because of ongoing stimulusdelivered by central banks. After some easing of monetary policies in 2019, central banks in themajoradvanced economies had indicated that their current policy settings were likely to remainappropriatefor some time. Central banks in the United States, Europe and Japan had recently left policysettingsunchanged, noting that some downside risks had receded for the time being. However, they hadalsosignalled that they were prepared to ease policy further if necessary, and markets wereexpecting somefurther easing in the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada in the year ahead. In China, thecentral bank had recently implemented targeted measures to support economic growth, including byproviding additional liquidity to the financial system.
Corporate financing conditions had generally remained favourable, including in Australia. Creditspreads were at low levels and global equity prices had been higher over recent months, notwithstandingthe volatility associated with the coronavirus outbreak. Members noted that equity marketvaluationswere high relative to earnings in a number of economies, which could be explained partly by lowlong-term bond yields keeping overall discount rates low relative to history.
Domestically, the reductions in the cash rate in 2019 had seen bank funding costs and lendingratesreach historic lows. The major banks were estimated to be paying interest of 25 basispoints orless on a little over one-quarter of their deposit funding. Around 60 basis points of the75 basis point reduction in the cash rate since mid 2019 had been passed through tostandardvariable mortgage rates. However, the actual rates that households were paying on theiroutstandingvariable-rate loans had declined by more than this, with the average rate declining by almost70 basis points over the same period. This additional decline reflected strong competitionamonglenders for high-quality borrowers and households continuing to switch from (more expensive)interest-only loans. If this were to continue, by around mid 2020 the average rate paid onoutstanding variable-rate mortgages would have declined by around 75 basis points since May2019.
Households' total mortgage payments increased in the December quarter, with a rise inprincipaland excess payments more than offsetting the decline in interest payments. Members discussedwhetherthis increase reflected a change in behaviour by households and the potential for it to persist.Theynoted that some households were likely to be repaying their debts faster in response to lowgrowth oftheir incomes and the earlier fall in housing prices. The process of balance sheet adjustmenthad beenfacilitated in part by the reductions in the cash rate as well as by the higher tax refunds forlow- andmiddle-income earners, both of which had boosted disposable incomes.
Consistent with stronger conditions in some established housing markets, housing loan commitmentshadcontinued to rise. That had been driven largely by owner-occupiers, and growth in creditextended toowner-occupiers had increased to 5½ per cent on a six-months-ended annualisedbasis inDecember. Despite accommodative funding conditions for large businesses, growth in business debthadslowed over the six months to December.
Financial market pricing at the time of the meeting suggested that market participants expected afurther 25 basis point cut in the cash rate by mid 2020.
Before turning to the policy decision, members reviewed the policy and academic discussionstakingplace around the world regarding the operation of macroeconomic policy and monetary policyframeworks inan environment where interest rates are low because of structural factors. These discussionsfocused ona range of issues, including: the appropriate level and specification of inflation targets; thecasesfor and against more aggressive monetary policy easing when policy interest rates are near theeffectivelower bound; the role of forward guidance and strategies for lowering long-term interest ratesand theirpotential side-effects; and the role of fiscal policy. Members also reviewed the internationaldiscussions regarding possible changes in the monetary transmission mechanism at low interestrates.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the outlook for the global economyremainedreasonable, with signs that the slowdown in global growth was coming to an end. The progress inaddressing the US–China trade and technology disputes had reduced but not eliminated animportantdownside risk to global growth. The coronavirus outbreak was a new source of uncertainty. Whileit wastoo early to tell what the overall effect would be, the outbreak presented a material near-termrisk tothe economic outlook for China and for international trade flows, and thereby the Australianeconomy.
Global financial conditions remained positive. This partly owed to ongoing stimulus delivered bycentral banks, and financial market participants expected some further monetary easing in someeconomies. Long-term government bond yields were back at very low levels, including inAustralia.Borrowing rates for households and businesses were at historically low levels, and there wasstrongcompetition among lenders for borrowers of high credit quality. Conditions in some establishedhousingmarkets had strengthened, and mortgage loan commitments had also picked up. The Australiandollar haddepreciated to be around its lowest level since 2009.
The outlook for the Australian economy was for growth to improve, supported by a turnaround inmininginvestment and, further out, dwelling investment and consumption. In the short term, the effectsof thebushfires were temporarily weighing on domestic growth, but the recovery was likely to reversethenegative effects on GDP by the end of the year. The forecast recovery in consumption growthremained akey uncertainty for the outlook. Consumption had been weak, as households had been graduallyadjustingtheir spending to the protracted period of slow growth in incomes and to the fall in housingprices.Although housing prices had been rebounding nationally, it was too soon to see the response tothis inhousehold spending, and it was unclear for how long the period of balance sheet adjustment wouldcontinue.
The unemployment rate had declined a little to 5.1 per cent and was expected to remainaroundthis level for some time before declining further to a little below 5 per cent aseconomicgrowth picked up. Wages growth was expected to be largely unchanged over the following couple ofyears.Members agreed that a further gradual lift in wages growth would be a welcome development andwas neededfor inflation to be sustainably within the 2–3 per cent target range.
In the December quarter, CPI inflation had been broadly as expected at 1.8 per centover theyear. Inflationary pressures had remained subdued, held down by flat housing-related costs.Inflationwas expected to increase gradually to 2 per cent over the following couple of years, inresponse to some tightening in labour market conditions.
Given this outlook, members considered how best to respond.
Members reviewed the case for a further reduction in the cash rate at the present meeting. Thiscaserested largely on the only gradual progress towards the Bank's inflation and unemploymentgoals.Lower interest rates could speed progress towards the Bank's goals and make it more assuredin theface of the current uncertainties. In considering this case, the Board took into account thatinterestrates had already been reduced to a low level and that there are long and variable lags in thetransmission of monetary policy. The Board also recognised that the incremental benefits offurtherinterest rate reductions needed to be weighed against the risks associated with very lowinterest rates.Internationally, concerns had been raised about the effect of very low interest rates onresourceallocation in the economy and their effect on the confidence of some people in the community, notablythose reliant on savings to finance their consumption. A further reduction in interest ratescould alsoencourage additional borrowing at a time when there was already a strong upswing in the housingmarket.
The Board concluded that the cash rate should be held steady at this meeting. Members agreed thatitwas reasonable to expect that an extended period of low interest rates would be required inAustralia toreach full employment and achieve the inflation target. The Board would continue to monitordevelopmentscarefully, including in the labour market, and remained prepared to ease monetary policy furtherifneeded to support sustainable growth in the economy, full employment and the achievement of theinflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 0.75 per cent.