Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 4 June 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Carol Schwartz AM, Catherine Tanna
Members granted leave of absence to Allan Moss AO in terms of section 18A of the Reserve Bank Act1959.
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Natasha Cassidy (Head, Prices, Wages and Labour Market Section, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Secretary)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion by noting that the data on the global economy released since theprevious meeting had been mixed. GDP growth outcomes for the March quarter in some economies had beenslightly stronger than the second half of 2018, while labour markets had remained tight. However, globaltrade and conditions in the global manufacturing sector had remained weak. New export orders had beenlittle changed at subdued levels and growth in industrial production had slowed in many economies, including those economies in east Asia that are closely integrated with global supply chains.
The US–China trade dispute had escalated in May, intensifying the downside risk posed to theglobal economic outlook from this source. The United States had proceeded to increase tariffs from10 per cent to 25 per cent on US$200 billion of imports from China, and China hadresponded by announcing that tariffs would increase by 5–25 per cent onUS$60 billion of US imports from 1 June 2019. In the days leading up to the meeting, theUS administration had also announced tariff measures affecting Mexico and India.
In the major advanced economies, GDP growth for the March quarter had been somewhat stronger than inthe second half of 2018. However, in both Japan and the United States the contribution from domesticdemand had declined, and investment intentions in Japan pointed to only moderate investment growth overthe period to early 2020. Nevertheless, labour markets in the advanced economies had remained tight. Asa result, wages growth had continued to increase, reaching around the highest rates recorded during thecurrent expansion in the three major advanced economies. Moreover, firms' employment intentionshad remained positive at high levels and firms had continued to report widespread difficulties infilling jobs.
Inflation had remained subdued globally despite tight labour markets and rising wages growth in manyadvanced economies. Core inflation had been below target in the three major advanced economies, following the decline in core inflation in the United States in recent months. Members noted thattemporary factors had been contributing to the decline in the US core inflation measure, with thetrimmed mean underlying inflation measure close to 2 per cent over recent months.
In China, indicators of activity had moderated in April. The moderation had partly reversed theunusually strong results in March, which had included activity brought forward ahead of tax changes thatcame into effect on 1 April 2019. Growth in fixed asset investment had slowed in April, driven by asharp fall in manufacturing investment, while infrastructure investment had been supported by increasedgovernment spending. Industrial production had slowed across a wide range of products in April, althoughproduction of construction-related materials – such as steel, plate glass and cement – hadremained strong.
Elsewhere in east Asia, growth had slowed further in the March quarter, mainly because of weaker growthin exports and investment. Growth in India had been at the lower end of the range of recent experience, with members noting that the recent tariff announcements by the US administration could adversely affectIndian exports of goods.
Commodity price movements had been mixed since the previous meeting. Iron ore and rural prices hadincreased. The increase in iron ore prices had been underpinned by supply constraints, strong demandfrom China and an increase in steel production. On the other hand, the prices of coal, oil and basemetals had declined. Members noted that the decline in oil prices had mainly reflected renewed concernsaround the outlook for global oil demand.
Domestic Economic Conditions
Members noted that national accounts data for GDP growth in the March quarter would be released the dayafter the meeting. GDP growth was expected to have been a little firmer than in the preceding twoquarters, supported by growth in exports, non-mining business investment and public spending. Growth inconsumption, however, was expected to continue to be sluggish and dwelling investment was expected tohave declined further in the March quarter.
Information received for the June quarter and indicators of future economic activity had been mixed.Business conditions and consumer sentiment had been broadly stable at or slightly above average levels.Information from the ABS capital expenditure survey and the Bank's business liaison contactssuggested that mining investment was close to its trough, while the available information pointed toongoing modest growth in non-residential building investment. Members noted that the low- andmiddle-income tax offset, including the increase announced in the Australian Government Budget for2019/20, would boost household disposable income and could support householdconsumption in the second half of 2019.
Members also discussed the distributional implications of low interest rates on household incomes.Lower interest rates lead to a decline in the interest that households pay on their debt, but also leadto a decline in the interest income that households receive from interest-bearing assets, such as termdeposits. As such, changes in interest rates have different effects on different groups of households.In particular, members recognised that many older Australians rely on interest income, which woulddecline with lower interest rates. The overall net effect of lower interest rates was neverthelessexpected to boost aggregate household disposable income and thus spending capacity.
Conditions in established housing markets had remained weak. Housing prices had continued to decline inSydney and Melbourne during May, although the pace of decline had eased from earlier in the year.Housing prices had continued to decline markedly in Perth. Members noted that the housing market waslikely to be affected by the removal of uncertainty around possible changes to taxation arrangementsrelating to housing. They also considered the effects of the Australian Prudential RegulationAuthority's (APRA's) proposal to amend its requirement for banks to determine theborrowing capacity of loan applicants using a specified minimum interest rate. While it remained tooearly to determine the overall effects, auction clearance rates had increased noticeably in Sydney theweekend following these developments. Building approvals had declined further in April, however, to bemore than 20 per cent lower over the preceding 12 months. This suggested that, even ifthere were a marked turnaround in housing sentiment, given the lags involved it would take some time forthis to translate into higher residential construction activity.
Several key domestic data series relating to the labour market had been released over the previousmonth. The wage price index had increased by 0.5 per cent in the March quarter to be2.3 per cent higher over the year. While wages growth had been higher than a year earlier inmost industries and states, the low rate of wages growth provided further evidence of spare capacity inthe labour market. Wages growth in the private sector had been unchanged in the March quarter, and hadincreased to 2.4 per cent over the year (2.7 per cent including bonuses). The FairWork Commission had recently granted a 3.0 per cent increase in the national minimum and awardclassification wages, which would take effect from 1 July 2019. Members noted that this decisiondirectly affected the wages of around one-fifth of workers in Australia. Public sector wages growth hadbeen little changed in recent years because of caps on salary increases for public sector employees.Members also noted that an increasing proportion of business liaison contacts were expecting wagesgrowth to be stable in the year ahead, although the proportion of contacts expecting wages growth todecline had continued to fall.
The data on conditions in the labour market in April had been mixed. The unemployment rate hadincreased to 5.2 per cent in April from (an upwardly revised) 5.1 per cent in March.This followed a six-month period during which the unemployment rate had remained at around5 per cent. The increase in the unemployment rate had been accompanied by an increase in theparticipation rate to its highest level on record. The underemployment rate had also increased in April.While the unemployment rate in both New South Wales and Victoria remained historically low, in bothstates it had increased since the beginning of 2019. Employment growth nationwide had moderated in 2019, but had remained above growth in the working-age population. Employment growth had been robust in moststates in preceding months; the exceptions were Western Australia and Tasmania, where the level ofemployment had been roughly unchanged since mid 2018.
Forward-looking indicators of labour demand pointed to a moderation in employment growth in the nearterm, to around the rate of growth in the working-age population. Measures of job advertisements haddeclined over recent months. Employment intentions reported by the Bank's business liaisoncontacts had been lower than in mid 2018, but these intentions were still generally positive.
Members had a detailed discussion of spare capacity in the labour market. Although difficult to measuredirectly, the extent of spare capacity in the labour market is an important factor that affects wagesgrowth and price inflation. On a number of measures, it was apparent that the labour market still hadsignificant spare capacity. The main approach to measuring spare capacity is to compare the currentunemployment rate with an estimate of the unemployment rate associated with full employment, which isthe rate of unemployment consistent with stable inflation. The Bank's estimate of thisunemployment rate had declined gradually over recent years, to be around 4½ per centcurrently.
Members noted the significant uncertainty around modelled estimates of the unemployment rate consistentwith full employment. They also discussed other measures of spare capacity, including underemployment ofpart-time workers, recognising that the supply side of the labour market had been quite flexible. Strongemployment growth over recent years had encouraged more people to join the labour force, allowing theeconomy to absorb increased activity without generating inflationary pressure. Notwithstanding theuncertainties involved, members revised their assessment of labour market capacity, acknowledging theaccumulation of evidence that there was now more capacity for the labour market to absorb additionallabour demand before inflation concerns would emerge.
Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of financial market developments by noting that escalating tradedisputes had led to a rise in volatility in global financial markets over preceding weeks, most notablyin equity markets. Nevertheless, with central banks expected to maintain expansionary policy settingsand risk premiums generally low, global financial conditions remained accommodative.
The escalation in the trade dispute between the United States and China had resulted in declines inglobal equity markets. The fall in equity prices had been particularly sharp in China, but substantialdeclines had also been seen in the United States as well as in a range of other advanced economies.Members observed that the declines in equity prices had been largest for sectors more directly exposedto the announced and prospective tariff changes and/or deriving a larger share of revenue frominternational trade.
By contrast, Australian equity prices were little changed at close to their highest level in a decade.Members noted that a sharp increase in Australian banks' share prices, following the federalelection, had partly offset a recent decline in resource stocks in the context of escalating tradetensions.
Members noted that there had been only a modest tightening in financial conditions in emerging markets, including in Mexico, where trade tensions with the United States had recently resurfaced. Equity priceshad declined and sovereign credit spreads had widened somewhat, and there had been modest outflows frombond and equity funds in emerging markets. Currencies of emerging market economies had also generallydepreciated a little, although there had mostly been little change in yields on government bondsdenominated in local currencies.
In the advanced economies, there had been some widening in yield spreads between corporate andsovereign debt, particularly for corporations rated below investment grade. Members observed thatfinancing costs for corporations remained low nonetheless, with government bond yields having declinedfurther over the preceding month, in some cases to historic lows. This had partly reflected a shift downin market participants' expectations of future policy interest rates in several advancedeconomies, including Australia, in an environment of ongoing trade tensions and subdued inflation. Inthe cases of the United States, Canada and New Zealand, members noted that market pricing implied alowering of policy rates in the period ahead, although central banks in these economies had notindicated that a near-term change in policy rates was in prospect.
Volatility in foreign exchange markets had generally remained low, although the Japanese yen hadappreciated over recent weeks, as tends to be the case in periods of increased uncertainty. There hadbeen a moderate depreciation of the Chinese renminbi over the preceding month.
Members noted that the Australian dollar had depreciated a little over preceding months, remainingaround the lower end of its narrow range of the preceding few years. Members also noted that while thestrength in commodity prices had supported the exchange rate, the decline in Australian government bondyields relative to those in the major markets over 2019 had worked in the opposite direction. Long-termgovernment bond yields in Australia remained noticeably below those in the United States, although thisgap had narrowed a little recently as market participants' expectations for the future path ofthe US federal funds rate were revised sharply lower.
Housing credit growth had stabilised in recent months, having slowed substantially over the precedingyear. Growth in housing lending to owner-occupiers was running at around 4½ per cent insix-month-ended annualised terms, while the rate of growth in housing lending to investors had beenclose to zero since early 2019. Although standard variable reference rates for housing loans hadincreased since mid 2018, the average rate paid on outstanding loans had been little changed sincethen, as banks had continued to compete for new borrowers by offering materially lower rates on newloans. Borrowers shifting from interest-only to principal-and-interest loans had also put downwardpressure on average outstanding mortgage rates.
Members were briefed on the changes proposed by APRA to its requirement that banks determine theborrowing capacity of loan applicants using a specified minimum interest rate. Members observed that theproposed changes would be likely to result in a modest increase in borrowing capacity for those withlower interest rate loans, typically owner-occupiers and borrowers with principal-and-interest loans.However, some borrowers facing higher-than-average interest rates would not see an increase in theirborrowing capacity. Members observed that such a change to serviceability assessments would mean thatany reduction in actual interest rates paid would increase households' borrowing capacity alittle. This would be in addition to the positive effect on the cash flow of the household sectoroverall.
The pace of growth in business lending had slowed in recent months, with lending to large businessescontinuing to be the sole source of growth. Lending to small businesses had declined over the precedingyear. Members noted that the stricter verification of income and expenses required for consumer lendingwas also being applied to many small businesses.
Members noted that financing conditions for both financial and non-financial corporations were highlyfavourable, with Australian bond yields at historic lows. Yields on residential mortgage-backedsecurities were also at low levels, having declined in line with the one-month bank bill swap rate(BBSW), which is the reference rate for these securities. Members observed that the increase in BBSW andother short-term money market rates in 2018 had been fully unwound. As a result, the major banks'debt funding costs were now at a historic low. The major banks' retail deposit rates were alsohistorically low, with deposit rates having continued to edge lower. The average interest rate paid onretail deposits by banks was slightly below the cash rate, although only a small share of deposits byvalue received a rate below 0.5 per cent (predominantly deposits on transactionaccounts).
Financial market pricing implied that the cash rate target was expected to be lowered by 25 basispoints at the present meeting, with a further 25 basis point reduction expected later in theyear.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members observed that the outlook for the global economyremained reasonable, although the risks from the international trade disputes had increased. Membersnoted that the associated uncertainty had been affecting investment intentions in a number of economiesand that international trade remained weak. At the same time, the Chinese authorities had continued toprovide targeted stimulus to support economic growth, and global financial conditions remained veryaccommodative. In most advanced economies, labour markets had remained tight and wages growth had pickedup, while inflation had remained subdued.
Members observed that the outlook for the Australian economy also remained reasonable, with thesustained low level of interest rates continuing to support economic activity. A pick-up in growth inhousehold disposable income, continued investment in infrastructure and a renewed expansion in theresources sector were expected to contribute to growth in output over coming years. The unemploymentrate was expected to decline a little towards the end of the forecast period, and underlying inflationwas expected to pick up gradually, to be at the lower end of the target range in the next couple ofyears. Members noted that this outlook was based on the usual technical assumption that the cash ratefollowed the path implied by market pricing, which suggested interest rates would be lower in the periodahead.
The most recent data on labour market conditions had shown that, despite ongoing strong growth inemployment, the unemployment rate had not declined any further in the preceding six months and had edgedup in the most recent two months. Reasonably strong demand for labour had been met partly by a rise inlabour force participation. Members observed that this increased flexibility on the supply side of thelabour market, together with ongoing subdued growth in wages and inflation, suggested that sparecapacity was likely to remain in the labour market for some time. While wages growth had picked up froma year earlier, it had remained subdued and recent data suggested the pick-up was only very gradual.Together, these data suggested that the Australian economy could sustain a lower rate of unemploymentthan previously estimated, while achieving inflation consistent with the target.
Members observed that underlying inflation had been below the 2–3 per cent targetrange for three years and that the lower-than-expected March quarter inflation data – at1½ per cent in underlying terms – had pointed to ongoing subdued inflationarypressures. In part, this reflected continued slow growth in wages. Members also observed thatcompetition in retailing, very weak growth in rents in the context of the housing market adjustment andgovernment initiatives to reduce cost-of-living pressures had been dampening inflation pressures. Thesefactors were likely to continue for some time. Members recognised that Australia's flexibleinflation targeting framework did not require inflation to be within the target range at all times, which allows the Board to set monetary policy so as best to achieve the Bank's broad objectives.However, they also agreed that the inflation target plays an important role as a strong medium-termanchor for inflation expectations, to help deliver low and stable inflation, which in turn supportssustainable growth in employment and incomes.
In these circumstances, members agreed that further improvement in the labour market would be requiredfor wages growth and inflation to rise to levels consistent with the medium-term inflation target.Moreover, while the Bank's central forecast scenario for growth and inflation was unchanged, theaccumulation of data on inflation and labour market conditions over recent months had led members torevise their assessment of the extent of inflationary pressure in the economy and, relatedly, the extentof spare capacity in the Australian labour market.
Given these considerations, members considered the case for a reduction in the cash rate at the currentmeeting. A lower level of interest rates would support growth in the economy, thereby reducingunemployment and contributing to inflation rising to a level consistent with the target.
Members recognised that, in the current environment, the main channels through which lower interestrates would support the economy were a lower value of the exchange rate, reduced borrowing rates forbusinesses, and lower required interest payments on borrowing by households, freeing up cash for otherexpenditure. Although households are net borrowers in aggregate, members recognised that there are manyindividual households that are net savers and whose interest income would be reduced by lower interestrates. Carefully considering these different effects, members judged that a lower level of interestrates was likely to support growth in employment and incomes, and promote stronger overall economicconditions.
Members also considered the risks associated with a lower level of interest rates in the period ahead.Given the high level of household debt, the adjustment under way in housing markets and the tighteningin lending practices, members judged that a decline in interest rates was unlikely to encourage amaterial pick-up in borrowing by households that would add to medium-term risks in the economy. Memberscontinued to recognise that there were risks to the forecasts for growth and inflation in bothdirections. However, given the extent of spare capacity in the economy and the subdued inflationarypressures, they judged there was a low likelihood of a decline in interest rates resulting in anunexpectedly strong pick-up in inflation. Members also observed that a lower level of interest rateswould stimulate activity and thereby improve the resilience of the Australian economy to any futureadverse shocks.
Taking into account all the available information, the Board decided that it was appropriate to lowerthe cash rate by 25 basis points at this meeting. A lower level of the cash rate would assist inreducing spare capacity in the labour market, providing more Australians with jobs and greaterconfidence that inflation will return to be comfortably within the medium-term target range in theperiod ahead. Given the amount of spare capacity in the labour market and the economy more broadly, members agreed that it was more likely than not that a further easing in monetary policy would beappropriate in the period ahead. They also recognised, however, that lower interest rates were not theonly policy option available to assist in lowering the rate of unemployment, consistent with themedium-term inflation target. Members agreed that, in assessing whether further monetary easing wasappropriate, developments in the labour market would be particularly important.
The Decision
The Board decided to lower the cash rate by 25 basis points to 1.25 per cent, effective 5 June.