Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 4 May 2021
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the globaloutlook had improved, and risks had become more balanced, because of progress in vaccinations and theprovision of additional fiscal support. Growth in the global economy was expected to rebound solidly inboth the current and the following year. Even so, the global recovery remained uneven. Output remainedwell below pre-pandemic levels in a number of countries because of recurring outbreaks of COVID-19, and in some emerging market economies, where financial conditions hadtightened, there was limited scope for ongoing large-scale fiscal support. The level of output wasexpected to remain below its pre-pandemic trajectory in many economies over the forecast period, withthe United States and China notable exceptions. Substantial spare capacity was likely to persist in mosteconomies, including in the services sector, keeping underlying inflation pressures subdued for sometime. However, members noted that the upswing in commodity prices would boost inflation readings in thenear term, and that it was possible that supply bottlenecks for some goods would be more persistent thangenerally assumed.
Members observed that a significant share of the population had been vaccinated in only a small numberof countries, notably the United States, United Kingdom and Israel. Some other countries where infectionrates had been relatively low through the pandemic, including Australia and in east Asia, were expectedto achieve high levels of inoculation by the end of 2021 or early 2022. However, vaccine suppliesremained limited in many emerging market countries, hampering their economic recoveries. India hadexperienced a very serious surge in infections, accounting for a large share of new cases globally andprompting curfews and partial lockdowns in the worst-affected states. This would weigh on the Indianeconomy in the June quarter.
Members observed that the global fiscal policy response to the pandemic had been the largest since atleast the Second World War, and that it continued to evolve. In the most acute phase of the pandemic, governments had prioritised direct fiscal support for health systems and households, and targetedmeasures aimed at reducing layoffs, such as wage subsidies for firms. The latter had limited the extentof economic scarring. The size and composition of the fiscal response had also varied considerablyacross countries, reflecting differences in health outcomes and the nature of automatic stabilisersalready in place. Fiscal support had been particularly large in the United States. Fiscal policy waslikely to remain supportive in most advanced economies for some time after the pandemic. In countrieswhere health outcomes were becoming more favourable, the focus of this fiscal support was likely to turntoward boosting public and private investment and other longer-term priorities.
A key development in the global economy in recent months had been the rebound in commodity and producerprices. Highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policy settings, a surge in global demand for goods anda strong recovery in industrial production in China and elsewhere had contributed to a sharp increase inthe prices of commodities and other inputs. In some cases, the rebound in global goods trade hadoutstripped the ability of global supply chains to cope, which had contributed to delays and upwardprice pressures for key components such as semiconductors; this in turn had hampered downstreamproduction for a variety of goods, such as motor vehicles. Strong demand for steel in China andinternational supply disruptions had also pushed iron ore prices to their highest levels in a decade andboosted Australia's terms of trade. The increase in commodity and other input prices was expectedto contribute to higher inflation globally in subsequent months, and members noted that inflationexpectations in advanced economies had also increased to be closer to central banks' targets.
Domestic economic developments
In turning to the domestic outlook, members noted that the Australian economy was transitioning fromrecovery to expansion earlier and with more momentum than previously anticipated. The unique features ofthe pandemic and the policy response had seen the economy rebound much faster than in previousdownturns. GDP was expected to have returned to its pre-pandemic level in the March quarter and therewere more people employed in March than before the onset of the pandemic. In response to the strongerstarting point and improved outlook further out, the forecast for GDP under the baseline scenario hadbeen revised upwards. GDP growth of 4¾ per cent was expected over 2021 and3½ per cent over 2022. If realised, this would leave the level of GDP a little below thatforecast before the pandemic, mostly owing to lower population growth. Members noted that the release ofthe Australian Government Budget in May would contain further information relevant to the outlook forpublic demand.
Members agreed that an important source of uncertainty for the domestic outlook was the path forhousehold consumption. In the baseline scenario, household consumption was expected to be supported bythe further lifting of restrictions on services, a stronger outlook for employment and thus labourincome, wealth effects from higher housing prices, and reduced uncertainty generally. In this scenario, households were assumed to treat the savings accumulated in the preceding year as wealth and thereforewere expected to consume only a small share of these savings over the forecast period; the householdsaving ratio was also expected to decline further.
Conditions in the housing market had continued to strengthen. Housing prices had increased further inApril. In recent months, the upswing in housing prices had become more broadly based across capitalcities and regional areas. Turnover had also increased to around its highest level in a number of years, with many properties staying on the market for short periods of time. Strong demand was encouraging anincrease in new listings, although the total stock of listings was below the average of recent yearsbecause new listings were being sold quickly. Rental markets had tightened in recent months butconditions remained uneven. Rents were increasing at a stronger pace for houses than for units, and inregional areas compared with capital cities. Rental vacancy rates remained high in Melbourne and, to alesser extent, Sydney, depressing advertised rents there. In other capital cities, vacancy rates werelow and advertised rents were increasing at a quicker pace.
The outlook for dwelling investment remained strong. Approvals for detached dwellings and alterations& additions had increased to record high levels in the March quarter, boosting the pipeline ofconstruction activity over 2021. In addition to the support provided by low interest rates, the increasein approvals had been driven by the HomeBuilder program and other state-based grants; commencement ofconstruction on many of the large number of projects being approved under these programs had onlyrecently begun. Some construction firms in the Bank's business liaison program had reported costpressures and delays to construction timelines owing to difficulties in securing materials andlabour.
Members noted that the strong recovery in domestic activity and policy support had lifted the outlookfor non-mining business investment, although this had followed a lengthy period in which it had beenweak. Strong profitability and a reported increase in capacity utilisation and business confidence wereexpected to provide further support for machinery & equipment investment in the near term, followinga strong response to the tax incentives provided by the Australian Government. Recent indicators, suchas building approvals, pointed to a more gradual recovery in private non-residential constructionactivity. The forecast profile for mining investment had been revised upwards a little, but there werefew signs that major mining firms were planning to expand iron ore-related investment in response tohigher prices.
Members discussed the continued improvement in labour market conditions. Employment and total hoursworked in March were higher than before the pandemic, underemployment had returned to pre-pandemiclevels, and the decline in the unemployment rate to 5.6 per cent in March had occurredconsiderably faster than expected earlier. Employment growth was expected to remain firm in the monthsahead, given the solid momentum in activity and buoyant forward indicators of labour demand. Somesurveyed firms were reporting a lack of available labour as a constraint on output. While job lossesfrom the end of the JobKeeper program were likely, these were expected to be more than offset by demandfor labour elsewhere in the economy.
Further out, the stronger forecast profile for growth in output and employment was expected graduallyto reduce spare capacity in the labour market. In the baseline scenario, the unemployment rate wasexpected to continue to decline to around its pre-pandemic level of 5 per cent by the end of2021 and to 4½ per cent by mid 2023. This lower forecast unemployment rate wasexpected to put some modest upward pressure on wages growth over time. Led by private sector wages, growth in the Wage Price Index was expected to pick up to a little under 2 per cent over 2021and to around 2¼ per cent by mid 2023.
Despite the strong recovery in economic activity, the recent Consumer Price Index (CPI) confirmed thatinflation pressures remain subdued in most parts of the Australian economy. The forecast for inflationhad been revised upwards slightly, in line with the stronger outlook for activity, but inflation wasstill expected to increase only gradually. In the baseline scenario, underlying inflation was expectedto increase from 1½ per cent over 2021 to close to 2 per cent by mid 2023.Headline inflation was expected to spike above 3 per cent over the year to June 2021, partlyas the effect of COVID-19-related one-off price changes dropped out of thecalculation, before declining back below 2 per cent over the remainder of the forecastperiod.
Members noted that the extent of spare capacity in the economy at the end of the forecast period wasuncertain, which meant that the gradual increase in inflation could be slower or faster than envisagedin the baseline scenario. Wage and price inflation were at much lower levels than over the precedingdecade, and, because of inertia in wage- and price-setting practices, it was possible that pricepressures could be slow to build even if spare capacity were absorbed more quickly than expected.Alternatively, higher commodity prices, persistent supply chain bottlenecks and firms' reducedability to address labour shortages through access to workers from abroad could mean that wages growthand inflation picked up earlier and more rapidly than expected as the economy continued to expand.
Although households had been adjusting well to the tapering of fiscal and other temporary supportmeasures, members concluded their discussion of the domestic economy by considering 2 alternativescenarios based on different assumptions for household consumption.
A stronger economic trajectory than the one envisaged in the baseline scenario was possible ifhouseholds increased spending by more than expected. This could be in response to stronger wealtheffects and a decline in uncertainty, which boosted households' willingness to consume out ofearlier savings and recurring labour income. As a result, private investment and employment would bestronger. The unemployment rate would decline at a faster pace and to a lower level, around3¾ per cent, compared with the baseline. In this upside scenario, inflation wouldincrease to around 2¼ per cent by mid 2023.
Alternatively, members noted that a weaker path for the economy could eventuate if households chose toconsume a smaller share of their income and accumulated savings than assumed in the baseline scenario.In this downside scenario, spending would be stimulated by less than implied by historical wealtheffects, with households assumed to continue strengthening their balance sheets, including by payingdown debt. Subdued consumption and private business investment would contribute to the unemployment rateremaining relatively high in this downside scenario, with inflation remaining around1½ per cent over much of the forecast period.
International financial markets
Members observed that financial market conditions had been broadly stable over the preceding month.Longer-term sovereign bond yields had settled around pre-pandemic levels in most advanced markets afterincreasing noticeably earlier in the year in response to the improving economic outlook. Most of theincreases in bond yields had reflected increases in expected inflation to levels that were consistentwith or below central banks' targets. Members noted that the increase in inflation expectations hadbeen most marked in the United States.
Corporate bond issuance had remained robust in advanced economy markets and spreads on corporate bondshad declined to low levels in expectation that the improved economic outlook would moderate the rise indefault rates seen over the preceding year. Equity prices had also increased further in prior months andin most of the major markets were above pre-pandemic levels. Members noted that equity issuance, particularly initial public offerings by so-called ‘blank-cheque’ financing vehicles inthe United States (which raise funds to invest in private companies to take public) had eased in recentweeks, having been very strong earlier in the year.
Major central banks had reiterated that their policy settings would remain highly accommodative untilsustained progress towards their employment and inflation objectives had been attained. The Bank ofCanada had upgraded its economic projections and updated its expectations for the timing of the firstincrease in its policy rate, which was closely aligned with market expectations that the first increasewould occur in the second half of 2022. Market pricing suggested that policy rates were expected tobegin to increase in New Zealand in late 2022 or early 2023, and in the United States and United Kingdomin the first half of 2023. The Bank of Canada had also announced a reduction in the pace of itsgovernment bond purchases. This change had been anticipated and there had not been a significant marketreaction to the announcement.
The US dollar had depreciated as bond markets had stabilised over the prior month to be backaround its levels against other major currencies at the start of the year. The Australian dollar hadcontinued to trade in a relatively narrow range, and was slightly above its levels at the start of theyear on a trade-weighted basis and against the US dollar.
In emerging market economies (EMEs), financial conditions had generally stabilised in line withdevelopments in the advanced economy markets. Flows into EME bond and equity funds had resumed, following some outflows during the period of heightened market volatility earlier in the year. Financialconditions in China had remained accommodative, although concerns about a large state-owned financialfirm had seen spreads widen on bonds issued into offshore markets by Chinese firms.
Domestic financial markets
In the domestic market, the Bank's policy measures had continued to underpin very low interestrates and the provision of credit. The yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond had remainedaround 10 basis points and no further purchases had been required to support the Bank's yieldtarget over the preceding 2 months. Nevertheless, yields on other 3-year financial instruments hadincreased since the start of 2021, and were consistent with market participants expecting the cash rateto begin increasing from its current level during 2023.
Yields on longer-dated Australian government bonds had moved roughly in line with US Treasuries overthe prior month and the spread between 10-year yields in the respective markets had remained close tozero. The Bank's bond purchase program had continued to run smoothly and in early April the Bankconcluded the initial $100 billion of purchases under the program. The second $100 billion ofbond purchases was scheduled to be completed in September. Projections suggested the Bank would holdaround 30 per cent of outstanding Australian government bonds and 15 per cent ofbonds issued by the semi-government authorities by the conclusion of the program in September.
Bank funding costs and lending rates had remained at historic lows. Drawings on the Bank's TermFunding Facility had increased as the 30 June deadline for accessing the 3-year funding programapproached. Liaison had indicated that many banks would take up most, if not all, of their remainingallowances. Demand for housing finance had continued to pick up, driven by owner-occupiers, although newlending to investors had also increased. Members noted that there had been a pick-up in issuance ofresidential mortgage-backed securities by non-banks at favourable spreads, which had been accompanied byan increase in their share of the household lending market. Lending to businesses had also increased alittle in preceding months, reflecting a pick-up in lending to large businesses.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economy had continued to recoverfrom the pandemic and the outlook was for strong growth in output in 2021 and the following year.Although the pace of COVID-19 vaccinations had been supporting the reboundin the global economy, the recovery remained uneven and some countries were yet to contain the virus.Global goods trade had continued to increase strongly and commodity prices were higher than at thebeginning of 2021. Despite the more positive real economic conditions, in many countries wages growthand inflation remained low and below central banks' targets.
In preceding weeks, sovereign bond yields had been steady after rising earlier in the year in responseto the positive news on vaccines and the additional sizeable fiscal stimulus in the United States.Inflation expectations had increased from around record lows to be closer to central banks'inflation targets, although central banks in major advanced economies had indicated no intention todampen monetary stimulus until inflation outcomes were sustainably higher than currently.
The economic recovery in Australia had been stronger than expected and the central forecast for GDPgrowth had been revised upwards. The recovery had been especially evident in the strong growth inemployment, with the unemployment rate expected to continue to decline from its current level of5.6 per cent.
Despite the strong recovery in economic activity in Australia, wage and price pressures remainedsubdued. The recent CPI data confirmed that inflation pressures remained low in most parts of theeconomy. A pick-up in inflation and wages growth was expected, but this was likely to be only gradualand modest despite the lift in the forecast for output growth. Members noted that inflation would risetemporarily above 3 per cent in the June quarter before falling back below the target. Sparecapacity in the economy and a strong focus on cost containment by businesses were both expected tocontribute to continued subdued wage and price pressures. Members also noted that public sector wagepolicies were likely to restrain aggregate wage outcomes. It would take some time for spare capacity tobe reduced and the labour market to be tight enough to generate wage increases consistent with achievingthe inflation target. Moreover, it was likely that wages growth would need to be sustainably above3 per cent, which was well above its current level.
Members noted that housing markets had strengthened further, with prices continuing to increase in allmajor markets. Housing credit growth had also strengthened, with strong demand from owner-occupiers, especially first-home buyers. Given the environment of strong demand for housing, rising housing pricesand low interest rates, members agreed on the importance of maintaining lending standards and carefullymonitoring trends in borrowing.
In discussing specific elements of the current monetary policy settings, members agreed that, at theJuly 2021 meeting, the Board would consider whether to retain the April 2024 bond as the target bond forthe 3-year yield target or to shift to the next maturity, the November 2024 bond. Members agreed that achange to the target of 10 basis points was not warranted. Also at the July meeting, the Boardwould consider future bond purchases following the completion in September of the second$100 billion of purchases under the government bond purchase program. The Board remained willing toundertake further bond purchases if doing so would assist with progress towards the Bank's goals offull employment and inflation. Future policy decisions would be based on close attention to the flow ofeconomic data and conditions in financial markets in Australia. Members agreed that a return to fullemployment is a high priority for monetary policy and would assist with achieving the inflation target.Consequently, monetary policy would be likely to need to remain highly accommodative for some timeyet.
Members noted that the date for final drawings under the Term Funding Facility is 30 June 2021, that banks had drawn down $100 billion and that a further $100 billion was available. Thefacility provides funding for 3 years, which means it will continue to support low funding costs inAustralia until mid 2024. In an environment where financial markets in Australia are operatingwell, the Board did not see a case for a further extension of this facility.
Members concluded their discussion by observing that the current package of monetary policy measureshad continued to support the economy by encouraging an ample supply of credit to businesses and keepingfinancing costs very low, thereby strengthening household and business balance sheets. The 3-yeargovernment bond yield remained at the Board's target of around 10 basis points and lendingrates on outstanding business and housing loans had continued to drift down from already low levels. Aswell as lowering domestic funding costs, the policy package had contributed to a lower exchange ratethan would otherwise have been the case. The Australian dollar had moved within a narrow range since thestart of the year, a period in which commodity prices had tended to increase. Together, monetary andfiscal policy had been supporting the recovery in aggregate demand and the pick-up in employment.
The Board remained committed to doing what it reasonably could to support the Australian economy, andwould maintain highly supportive monetary conditions until its goals for employment and inflation wereachieved. Members affirmed that the cash rate target would be maintained at 10 basis points, andthe rate of remuneration on Exchange Settlement balances at zero, for as long as necessary. The Boardwill not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to3 per cent target range. For this to occur, wages growth would need to be materially higherthan it is currently. This would require significant gains in employment and a return to a tight labourmarket. The Board viewed these conditions as unlikely until 2024 at the earliest.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.1 per centan interest rate of zero on Exchange Settlement balances held by financial institutions at theBanka target of around 0.1 per cent for the yield on the 3-year Australian Governmentbondthe expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small andmedium-sized businesses, with an interest rate on new drawings until 30 June 2021 of0.1 per centthe purchase of an additional $100 billion of government bonds at the same rate of$5 billion per week following completion of the first bond purchase program of$100 billion.