Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 5 February 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AM, Catherine Tanna
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Penny Smith(Deputy Head, Financial Stability Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Secretary)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that growth in Australia'smajor trading partners had been above trend, despite moderating in the second half of 2018.Growth in major trading partners was forecast to be around trend in 2019 and 2020. However, thedownside risks to the global outlook had increased in the preceding few months. Members notedthat it was difficult to predict the effectiveness of recent policy measures in China and howthe authorities would balance their objectives of supporting growth and containing financialrisks. Trade tensions and signs of slowing domestic demand had also increased the risks to theoutlook for China. More broadly, trade tensions remained a material risk to the global growthoutlook.
US exports to China and Chinese exports to the United States had fallen sharply in late 2018 asa result of earlier tariff increases. There had been ongoing speculation that the United Statesmight impose tariffs on automotive imports, which would affect imports from Germany and Japan.Some economies, particularly in the east Asian region, had been affected by the trade tensionsbecause they provide inputs to Chinese exports as part of global supply chains. A number ofeconomies had also faced a moderation in export growth because Chinese domestic demand hadslowed. However, members noted that there had also been reports of firms accelerating existingplans to shift production from China to other low-cost producers in the east Asian region.
Labour markets had tightened further in most advanced economies and wages growth had increased.Core inflation had picked up to be close to target in some advanced economies, but remained lowin others. Headline inflation had declined towards the end of 2018 because oil prices had fallenby almost 30 per cent from their peak in October.
GDP growth in the United States had remained strong over 2018. Fiscal stimulus and strongemployment growth had supported consumption growth. The labour market had continued to tightenin early 2019 and wages growth had picked up. However, the outlook for investment had softened.Some measures of business and consumer confidence had fallen sharply in January. However, members noted that it was difficult to determine whether this reflected uncertainty associatedwith volatility in financial markets or a genuine deterioration in the circumstances facingbusinesses and consumers.
GDP growth in Japan was expected to recover after the sharp slowing in the September quarter, which had mainly reflected disruptions from natural disasters. Growth in consumption had beensupported by a strong labour market and a pick-up in wages growth. Members noted thatconsumption would receive a short-term boost as consumers brought forward spending ahead of anincrease in the consumption tax in October. Recent data suggested that business conditions inJapan had also remained positive. By contrast, growth in output in the euro area had slowed over2018, reflecting a combination of weaker external demand, especially from China, and somelocalised factors that could have persistent effects, particularly if they were not resolvedquickly. Investment intentions and surveyed business conditions had fallen recently in the euroarea.
GDP growth in China had slowed in 2018, as had been expected given the earlier tightening infinancial conditions. However, there were signs that underlying momentum in the Chinese economyhad slowed by more than suggested by the GDP data. The authorities had responded with furthertargeted policy measures. Many of these measures were aimed at encouraging spending oninfrastructure, which had led to a lift in growth in public infrastructure investment and anupgrade to the outlook for steel demand. In India, crude steel production had remained high in2018, despite an easing in GDP growth overall.
The improved outlook for steel demand and stockpiling ahead of the Chinese New Year hadsupported prices for iron ore at the end of 2018, and earlier increases in oil prices hadboosted liquefied natural gas (LNG) prices. As a result, Australia's terms of trade wereexpected to have increased in the December quarter. Iron ore prices had increased further in2019, following the collapse of a tailings dam at an iron ore mine in Brazil and the subsequentclosure of a number of other similar mines. Members observed that iron ore prices could remainhigh for some time, but prices were still expected to decline over the medium term. Lookingahead, the effect of higher iron ore prices on the terms of trade was expected to be offset bythe effect of lower prices for LNG, as the decline in oil prices since October gradually feedsthrough.
Domestic Economic Conditions
The September quarter national accounts had been released the day after the December meeting.Members noted that growth in real GDP of 0.3 per cent in the quarter and 2.8 per centover the year had been noticeably below expectations. There had also been downward revisions toGDP growth in previous quarters, which had subtracted around ¼ percentage point from theyear-ended growth rate. Taking account of this and other information, the Bank had revised downits forecast for growth in the Australian economy by around ¼ percentage point for both 2019 and2020. This primarily reflected a modest downgrading of the outlook for household consumption andresidential construction. The outlook had also become more uncertain over the preceding fewmonths.
Growth in GDP was expected to be around 3 per cent over 2019, supported byaccommodative monetary policy and ongoing strength in public spending and business investment.Further gradual tightening in the labour market was expected to support growth in householdincome and consequently growth in household consumption. GDP growth was expected to moderate to2¾ per cent over 2020 because LNG output was expected to reach targeted levels ofproduction and would therefore no longer materially add to growth. Dwelling investment was alsoexpected to decline more sharply than previously expected, consistent with the decline inresidential building approvals and the fall in housing prices.
Growth in consumption had slowed to 2½ per cent over the year to the Septemberquarter. Revisions to previously published data made it difficult to assess the underlyingmomentum of consumption over the preceding year. On balance, the slower reported growth inconsumption, together with subdued growth in retail sales in the December quarter and the likelyeffect of lower housing prices and reduced housing market activity on consumption, warranted adownward revision to the outlook for consumption. As a result, year-ended growth in consumptionwas expected to pick up only a little over the forecast period. Members noted that uncertaintyabout the recent momentum of consumption and factors affecting households' futureconsumption decisions remained a key risk for the domestic economic outlook.
Dwelling investment was likely to have been close to its peak in the second half of 2018.Although there was still a large pipeline of residential work to be done and few signs thatprojects already under way were being cancelled, it had become more difficult for new apartmentprojects to obtain finance, and building approvals were the lowest they had been for five years.As a result, dwelling investment was expected to remain at a high level in the near term, butthen to decline faster than previously expected. Members noted the uncertainty about the extentand speed of the downturn in the dwelling investment cycle.
Non-mining investment had been flat in the September quarter. Non-residential construction haddeclined, but the pipeline of work yet to be done had remained relatively high, suggesting thatnon-residential construction would recover in coming quarters. Investment in machinery &equipment and computer software had grown solidly in the September quarter. A reasonablypositive outlook for investment was supported by continued growth in corporate profits andaccommodative financial conditions for larger firms, although conditions for smaller firms hadbeen more constrained. While information from liaison implied that the economy had reasonablemomentum around the turn of the year, surveyed business conditions had declined to around theirlong-run average. A large pipeline of projects was expected to support growth in publicinvestment over the following year.
Mining investment had fallen in the September quarter. Liaison had suggested that very littleadditional spending was needed to bring the remaining LNG projects on line. Mining investmentwas expected to increase over the forecast period as mining firms invest to maintain production;this outlook was supported by mining firms' profitability having remained strong. Membersnoted that the declines in mining investment that had weighed on growth for the previous sixyears were close to an end, and instead mining investment was expected to make a smallcontribution to output growth in the forecast period. Recent trade data suggested that supplydisruptions had continued to affect resource exports in the December quarter.
Farm output had fallen by 8 per cent over the year to the September quarter, subtracting around ¼ percentage point from year-ended GDP growth. Members noted that the outlookfor the farm sector continued to depend on the timing and magnitude of rainfall;drier-than-average conditions in key farming areas were expected to continue in the near term.Recent trade data suggested that rural exports had fallen in the December quarter, and theAustralian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences had revised down itsforecast for farm production in 2018/19.
Members noted the continued improvement in conditions in the labour market and that the labourmarket data had been stronger than other data on economic activity. Employment had continued togrow faster than the working-age population in the December quarter, with most of this growth infull-time employment. Forward-looking indicators had been consistent with above-averageemployment growth over the first half of 2019. The unemployment rate had declined to 5 per cent, which was the lowest rate since 2011 and lower than had been expected a year earlier. Labourmarket conditions had been particularly strong in New South Wales and Victoria, whereunemployment rates had fallen to be between 4 and 4½ per cent. The nationalunemployment rate was expected to edge a little lower to around 4¾ per cent over thefollowing few years. Tightening labour market conditions were expected to put upward pressure onwages, although to date wages growth in Australia and elsewhere had been slower to pick up thanin previous expansions.
Turning to the latest data on inflation, members noted that inflation had remained low in theDecember quarter, with both headline and underlying inflation a little under ½ per centin the quarter and around 1¾ per cent over the year. Headline inflation had been lowerthan forecast, largely because fuel prices had been lower than expected in the quarter. Domesticcost pressures had been relatively subdued, partly because wages growth had remained low. Morerecently, utilities prices had increased only modestly, after substantial increases in previousyears, and inflation in the prices of other administered services had declined noticeably as aresult of government pricing decisions.
Strong competition in the retail sector had continued to dampen inflation, although deflationarypressures in the retail sector appeared to have eased somewhat in the December quarter. Thiscould have reflected some pass-through of the modest depreciation of the Australian dollar over2018. The drought had also contributed to higher retail inflation for food, particularly meat.
Inflation in rents had remained subdued and data on newly advertised rents suggested there waslittle prospect of a pick-up in the near term. Rent inflation had started to trend lower inSydney, where the rental vacancy rate had risen and was expected to rise further in the nearterm as more supply becomes available. Rents in Perth had fallen further, although the pace ofdeflation had eased. Inflation in the cost of new housing construction had trended lower, despite the high level of dwelling investment.
Members noted that the inflation outcome for the December quarter had been fairly close toexpectations. However, the forecast pick-up in underlying inflation was now expected to occur alittle later than previously expected, mainly as a result of the lower forecast for growth inGDP and downside risks to utilities and administered price inflation in the near term.Underlying inflation was expected to increase to 2 per cent by the end of 2019(previously by mid 2019) and to reach 2¼ per cent by the end of 2020. Headlineinflation was expected to fall to 1¼ per cent in mid 2019 as a result of the fall infuel prices since the December quarter, on the assumption the lower oil price is sustained.
Members spent some time considering a paper on the implications of recent developments inhousing markets for the economic outlook. After rising by almost 50 per cent over thefive years to September 2017, national housing prices had fallen by around 8 per centto be back around mid-2016 levels. Members noted the significantly different developments inhousing prices across the country. Housing prices had fallen by 12 per cent in Sydneyand by 9 per cent in Melbourne from their peaks in 2017. There had also beensignificant falls in housing prices in Perth and Darwin over recent years. By contrast, housingprices in Hobart and Canberra had increased over 2018, while housing prices in Adelaide, Brisbane and many regional centres had been flat. Members noted that the cumulative falls inhousing prices in Sydney and Melbourne were relatively large by historical standards, and thatit was unusual for housing prices to fall significantly in an environment of low mortgageinterest rates and a declining unemployment rate.
Members noted that some of the dynamics in housing prices could be explained by the fact thatthe supply of housing does not respond quickly to changes in demand. In particular, the run-upin housing prices had occurred during a period when housing supply had not picked upsufficiently to match higher demand from more rapid population growth. Over time, higher housingprices had eventually led to a sizeable increase in supply, but this had taken longer than inprevious cycles. Another factor weighing on prices was a noticeable decline in demand fromforeign buyers in recent years, which had also been apparent in housing markets in some othereconomies.
Rental vacancy rates are one key indicator of the balance of supply and demand in the housingmarket. In most states, rental vacancies had been around or somewhat below average at the end of2018, suggesting supply and demand for housing had been roughly balanced. In Melbourne, despitethe fall in prices and large increase in supply, the vacancy rate had declined. By contrast, rental vacancies in Sydney had been increasing and advertised rents had fallen.
Members also noted that housing credit growth had declined further in preceding months and thatthere had been a notable drop in loan approvals by the major banks. Growth in lending toinvestors had slowed sharply since mid 2017 to be close to zero, while growth in lending toowner-occupiers had moderated to around 5½ per cent in six-month-endedannualised terms.
The slower growth in lending for housing over the preceding year appeared to reflect weakerdemand. Nevertheless, credit conditions for some borrowers had remained tighter than they hadbeen for some time following the strengthening of lending policies and practices over recentyears. Liaison with mortgage brokers suggested that the increased public scrutiny associatedwith the Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial ServicesIndustry may have led some individual loan assessors at banks to apply stricter criteria thanspecified in official lending requirements. However, banks reported that while loan assessorshad been referring more approvals to credit officers, final loanapproval rates had remained high. Moreover, lenders had continued to compete for borrowers ofhigh credit quality by offering new loans at lower interest rates than those offered on existingloans.
From a longer-run perspective, members assessed that, following such large increases in housingprices, the effect of the recent price falls on overall economic activity was expected to berelatively small. However, members observed that if prices were to fall much further, consumption could be weaker than forecast, which would result in lower GDP growth, higherunemployment and lower inflation than forecast. From a financial stability perspective, tighterlending standards, an improving labour market and low interest rates were all likely to supporthouseholds' capacity to service their debt. Few households were in negative equity positionsdespite the falls in housing prices, implying that banks' losses would be limited even ifhousehold financial stress were to become more widespread.
Financial Markets
Turning to other financial market developments, members observed that while housing creditgrowth had declined, business credit growth had strengthened over 2018, with contributions fromthe foreign banks and the major banks. However, this growth had been driven by increased lendingto large businesses.
Members observed that conditions had tightened somewhat in a number of Australian financialmarkets, in line with global developments. Spreads of bank bond yields to Australian governmentbonds had widened a little, reflecting a global rise in risk premiums. Nevertheless, yields onbank bonds were little changed around the level of the preceding few years, given the decline inAustralian government bond yields. Australian equity prices had declined in the December quarteralong with global equity markets, but had recovered in January to be back around their Octoberlevels. Members noted that share prices of Australian banks had risen on the morning of themeeting, following the release of the final report of the royal commission and the Government'sresponse the preceding afternoon.
Money market interest rates had remained higher than a year earlier, contributing to a smallincrease in banks' funding costs over the period since then. In response, most lenders hadincreased their standard variable mortgage interest rates a little since mid 2018. However, theeffect of rising standard variable rates had been partly offset by borrowers refinancing atlower rates, given the strong competition for low-risk borrowers. Members noted that, overall, mortgage interest rates remained relatively low.
Turning to global financial markets, members observed that financial conditions had tightenedsomewhat in recent months in most advanced economies, with increased volatility and a generalrise in equity and credit risk premiums. Nevertheless, there had been a partial retracement ofthe tightening in recent weeks and financial conditions remained accommodative.
At its January meeting, the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) had left the federal fundsrate unchanged and removed its forward guidance for further interest rate increases. The FOMChad emphasised that it would be patient in making any future adjustments to the federal fundsrate, and that future monetary policy decisions would be more closely guided by the incomingdata because interest rates were closer to estimates of neutral. The FOMC had also indicatedthat it would be open to slowing the pace of its planned balance sheet reduction if warranted byeconomic or market developments. Financial market pricing had shifted to imply that the nextmove in the federal funds rate was expected to be down, although this was not expected to occuruntil at least late 2020. Elsewhere, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan wereexpected to maintain their stimulatory policy settings for an extended period.
Members noted that government bond yields had declined across the major global markets over thepreceding two months, reflecting the downward shift in expectations for future policy rates, along with a fall in compensation for future inflation following falls in oil prices. Thesechanges had also reflected increased concerns about downside risks to the outlook for globalgrowth. Australian government bond yields had declined broadly in line with global developments, with long-term government bond yields in Australia remaining around 50 basis points below thosein the United States.
There had been a modest depreciation of the US dollar in nominal trade-weighted terms since late2018, reflecting the more noticeable shift in the outlook for monetary policy in the UnitedStates than in other major economies. Members noted that the depreciation had been morepronounced against the Japanese yen, which had appreciated to around its highest level in twoyears on a trade-weighted basis. The Chinese renminbi had also appreciated modestly over thepreceding month, reflecting the depreciation of the US dollar as well as signs of some progresson US–China trade negotiations.
The Australian dollar had depreciated a little further in nominal trade-weighted terms over thepreceding two months, largely reflecting the appreciation of the yen and renminbi. However, overall, the Australian dollar had remained within the range observed over the preceding fewyears. Members observed that there had been two broadly offsetting influences on the Australiandollar exchange rate over the preceding year: the increase in commodity prices and the terms oftrade had been supporting the Australian dollar over this period, while the relative decline inAustralian government bond yields had been working in the opposite direction.
In global capital markets, corporate bond spreads had risen in recent months and bond issuancehad eased, particularly for lower-rated borrowers. There had been some retracement of theincrease in corporate borrowing costs in early 2019. Similarly, global equity markets haddeclined sharply in late 2018, before recovering somewhat since. The widening in credit spreadsand decline in equity prices had reflected lower expectations for corporate earnings growth, aswell as a rise in the risk premium demanded by investors. However, members observed that overallborrowing costs for corporations had remained low as a result of low government bond yields, andthe corrections in these markets had followed an extended period of elevated valuations, particularly in the United States.
In China, the authorities had implemented further targeted measures to support lending toprivate firms, particularly small-sized enterprises, in the context of slowing economic growth.These firms' access to finance had been tightened over the course of 2018 as a result ofearlier measures by the authorities to reduce risks in the financial system by restricting theavailability of ‘shadow finance’. Since the latter part of 2018, the authorities hadbeen encouraging banks to increase their lending to these types of firms, although members notedthat larger banks were less accustomed to lending to this sector.
Members noted that conditions in other emerging markets had stabilised in recent months, following a tightening in conditions during 2018. Currencies had appreciated, equity prices hadrisen, bond spreads had narrowed and capital outflows had moderated across a number of emergingmarket economies. These developments had reflected policy adjustments in some countries, lowerpolicy rate expectations in the United States and the associated depreciation of the US dollar, and, for oil-importing countries, the decline in oil prices. However, members noted that thereremained a risk that financial conditions in emerging markets could tighten further. Concernsabout trade tensions and a slowdown in growth, particularly in China, remained particularlyimportant for emerging markets in Asia.
Financial market pricing implied that the Australian cash rate was expected to remain unchangedfor a considerable period, with some expectation of a decrease by late 2019.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members observed that the global economy hadcontinued to grow at an above-trend pace in 2018, although growth had moderated in someeconomies in the second half of the year. In particular, growth in China had slowed further andthe authorities had continued to ease policy in a targeted way to support growth, whilecontinuing to pay close attention to risks in the financial sector. Labour markets in theadvanced economies had continued to tighten and wages growth had picked up. Core inflation hadpicked up in a number of economies, including the United States. Globally, lower oil prices hadled to a decline in headline inflation.
Growth in Australia's major trading partners was expected to be around trend over thefollowing year or so, but the downside risks had increased. Slowing growth in China and ongoingtrade tensions had led to lower growth in global trade. Forecasters had lowered their outlookfor global growth and market participants no longer expected a further tightening of monetarypolicy in the United States. Government bond yields had also declined in most countries, including Australia. More broadly, however, financial conditions had tightened somewhat in mostmajor advanced economies, but remained accommodative. The terms of trade had remained abovetheir trough in early 2016 and the Australian dollar had remained within its narrow range ofrecent times.
Domestically, growth in output had been weaker than expected in the September quarter.Nevertheless, growth was expected to be a little above trend over the forecast period. Theoutlook for business investment and spending on public infrastructure was positive. Growth inconsumption was expected to be supported by a pick-up in growth in household disposable income, although recent data had prompted a downward revision to the consumption outlook. The outlookfor consumption continued to be one of the key uncertainties for the forecasts for the domesticeconomy, given the environment of declining housing prices, low growth in household income andhigh debt levels.
Following a significant increase in construction activity and a large run-up in housing prices, housing markets were going through a period of adjustment. Housing prices in Sydney andMelbourne had declined further and the outlook for dwelling investment had been revised lower.In Sydney, rental vacancy rates had been increasing and rent inflation remained low across thecountry. Credit conditions had tightened for some borrowers and the demand for credit in thehousing market, particularly by investors, had slowed noticeably as the dynamics of the housingmarket had changed. But housing lending rates had remained low and there was strong competitionfor borrowers of high credit quality.
The labour market had tightened further over 2018 and there had been some pick-up in wagesgrowth. The unemployment rate had declined by ½ percentage point to 5 per cent, its lowest level in over seven years, and employment growth had been above average. The Bank'sforecast was for the unemployment rate to decline a little further over the following few years.The vacancy rate was high and there were reports of skills shortages in some areas. Wages growthwas expected to pick up gradually over the following year or so.
Inflation had remained low and stable in both headline and underlying terms over 2018.Underlying inflation was expected to pick up gradually over the forecast period, althoughheadline inflation was expected to decline in the near term because of lower petrol prices.
Members noted that the sustained low level of interest rates over recent years had beensupporting economic activity and had allowed for gradual progress to be made in reducing theunemployment rate and returning inflation towards the midpoint of the target. While the labourmarket had continued to strengthen over the preceding year, less progress had been made oninflation. Taking account of the available information on current economic and financialconditions, as well as the revised forecasts, members assessed that the current stance ofmonetary policy should continue to allow for further gradual progress on both unemployment andinflation to be made. However, members noted that there were significant uncertainties aroundthe forecasts, with scenarios where an increase in the cash rate would be appropriate at somepoint and other scenarios where a decrease in the cash rate would be appropriate. Moreover, theprobabilities around these scenarios were now more evenly balanced than they had been over thepreceding year, when an eventual increase in the cash rate had appeared more likely.
Members would continue to assess the outlook carefully. However, given that further progress inreducing unemployment and lifting inflation was a reasonable expectation, members agreed thatthere was not a strong case for a near-term adjustment in monetary policy. Rather, they assessedthat it would be appropriate to hold the cash rate steady and for the Bank to be a source ofstability and confidence while further progress unfolds. Members judged that holding the stanceof monetary policy unchanged at this meeting would be consistent with sustainable growth in theeconomy and achieving the inflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 1.5 per cent.