Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 5 March 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AM, Catherine Tanna
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler(Head, Domestic Markets Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Secretary)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that new information had beensomewhat limited over the preceding month because of the government shutdown in the UnitedStates and the Lunar New Year holiday period across Asia. The global economy had grown abovetrend in 2018, although it had slowed in the second half of the year and the more recent datathat had been received had been consistent with a continuation of slower global growth in thefourth quarter of 2018 and early 2019, particularly in the euro area and parts of Asia.Notwithstanding the slower growth in output, labour markets in the major advanced economies hadremained tight and there had been ongoing signs of upward pressure on wages. However, this hadnot translated into materially higher inflation. Core inflation had remained around target inthe United States and a few other advanced economies, but had remained below target in manyother economies. Headline inflation had generally declined because of the substantial fall inoil prices in late 2018.
Trade tensions had remained a continued source of uncertainty for the global outlook. The delayin tariff increases previously scheduled for 1 March had generated some optimism that tensionscould ease. However, the increases in tariffs implemented in 2018 had continued to weigh ontrade between the United States and China, and there had been spillover effects on some othereconomies. Notably, a decline in Chinese imports, both to meet domestic demand and facilitateexport production, had been apparent in export growth in the September quarter in east Asia.Intra-regional export growth had also eased, although exports from east Asia to the majoradvanced economies had been relatively resilient, and survey measures of new export orders ineast Asia had declined sharply to be below average early in 2019. The prospect of further tariffincreases on automobile imports into the United States had received considerable mediaattention; Germany and Japan were likely to be particularly affected.
In the major advanced economies, GDP growth had diverged over 2018. The large fiscal stimulushad boosted GDP growth in the United States over 2018 to well above estimates of potential.Growth in consumption had been supported by strong employment growth and the pick-up in wagesgrowth. Investment, particularly in machinery & equipment and intellectual property, had alsocontributed significantly to growth in output. Key surveys of US manufacturing indicated thatconditions had eased in recent months.
By contrast, growth in the euro area had eased in the second half of 2018. Members observed thatthis slowing had been quite broadly based across countries. Some of the loss of momentum hadcome from weaker external demand, particularly from China; survey measures of export orderssuggested that the weakness in external demand had continued into early 2019. Disruptions toGerman automotive production related to compliance issues around emissions standards had alsocontributed to the weaker growth and, while these were expected to be temporary, they hadpersisted at least into January.
Output growth in Japan had picked up in the December quarter, following subdued growth in theSeptember quarter, which was partly attributable to natural disasters. Members noted thatdomestic demand had held up well in Japan, despite weaker external demand, particularly fromChina.
In China, the authorities had announced a range of new fiscal easing measures and had also takensteps to ease financial conditions in recent months in response to concerns about slower growthin output in the second half of 2018. Members noted that the effect of this policy easing oneconomic activity was difficult to determine because the Chinese New Year holiday had affectedthe timing of data releases for January and February. The available data, such as surveys ofbusiness conditions, had pointed to subdued conditions in the manufacturing sector early in2019. Price pressures had also remained low.
In commodity markets, the price of Brent crude oil had increased since the previous meeting, butremained around 25 per cent below its peak in October 2018. Coking coal prices hadalso risen since the previous meeting, reflecting disruptions to supply from Queensland. Ironore prices had been little changed. The outlook for Australian coking and thermal coal priceshad become more uncertain in light of reports that there had been an increase in customsprocessing times for Australian coal at some Chinese ports and a build-up of inventories.
Domestic Economic Conditions
Members observed that labour market conditions had continued to improve, despite a slowing inthe momentum of output growth in the second half of 2018. Members noted that the nationalaccounts for the December quarter would be released the day after the meeting. They wereexpected to show that GDP growth over 2018 had been a little lower than anticipated at the timeof the February Statement on Monetary Policy, and were likely to confirm a markedly slower paceof growth in the second half of 2018 than in the first half.
Business investment was expected to have increased modestly in the December quarter, led by thenon-mining sector. Mining investment was expected to have declined, consistent with theconstruction phase of the remaining liquefied natural gas projects nearing completion.
The ABS capital expenditure (Capex) survey had provided an updated estimate of investmentintentions for 2018/19 and the first estimate for 2019/20.
In the non mining sector, the Capex survey and other forward-looking indicators pointed tomodest growth in investment over 2018/19. The gradual pick-up was projected to continue into2019/20 for expenditure on buildings and structures. This projection was consistent with thehigh level of non-residential construction work yet to be done, although building approvals fornon-residential construction had declined over preceding months. Members noted that activity insegments of the commercial property sector had been quite strong. Some of the recent strength innon-mining investment had been in structures, which includes investment in roads and renewableenergy, and this was expected to continue. However, the Capex data suggested that there may beless expenditure on machinery & equipment investment in the non-mining sector in 2019/20, although members noted that these early estimates were quite uncertain. Members also noted someof the limitations in the coverage of the Capex survey: it excludes the investment intentions ofa range of sectors, including health and education, and investment in certain types of assets, such as computer software. More broadly, survey measures of business conditions had ticked up tobe slightly above average across most states and industries in early 2019, but were lower than ayear earlier.
The Capex data were consistent with mining investment reaching a trough in 2018/19 andincreasing gradually in 2019/20 as firms invest to sustain production. This increase insustaining investment was expected to support resource export volumes over the forecast period.By contrast, conditions in the agricultural sector were expected to remain difficult in the nearterm, limiting rural exports from some regions. Rainfall in south-eastern Queensland had beenclose to the lowest on record between December and February, at the same time as northernQueensland had experienced flooding.
The available data indicated that established housing prices in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth haddeclined further since the beginning of 2019, although both price and non-price indicators forhousing were difficult to interpret during the seasonal lull in sales activity over January. InSydney, housing prices were 13 per cent lower than their July 2017 peak, while inMelbourne housing prices were 10 per cent lower than their November 2017 peak. Auctionclearance rates in Sydney and Melbourne had picked up over February. In Perth, housing priceshad declined to 2006 levels, although rental vacancy rates had fallen to around average andnewly advertised rents had been rising. Members noted that the Perth housing market was stilladjusting to lower population growth and higher unemployment rates, but that the increase inmining investment was likely to have a positive effect.
Dwelling investment was expected to have decreased in the December quarter; preliminary datasuggested that investment in both new dwellings and alterations and additions had declined inthe quarter. Members noted that the pipeline of work to be done remained large and was expectedto support dwelling investment through 2019, particularly in New South Wales and Victoria.However, residential building approvals and information from the Bank's liaison programpointed to a marked slowing in dwelling investment in one to two years' time, unlesspre-sales increased significantly in the following few quarters. The recent weakness in sales ofdetached new houses had been most pronounced in Sydney and Melbourne, but had also been evidentin other locations. Contacts had reported that tighter access to credit for off-the-plan andproject homes had been constraining buyer demand.
Consumption was expected to have contributed more to growth in the December quarter than in theSeptember quarter, when consumption growth had been soft. Consumer sentiment had been broadlystable, supported by ongoing strength in the labour market, but the momentum in consumptiongrowth had remained a key source of uncertainty given its variability over recent quarters.Retail sales volumes had increased by just 0.1 per cent in the December quarter andgrowth had eased to 1.6 per cent in year-ended terms. Information from liaisonindicated that retail conditions had softened in December because some Christmas spending hadbeen brought forward to November, but had remained stable since then. Growth in retail sales hadbeen particularly weak in New South Wales and for large discretionary items such as householdgoods and furnishings. Members noted that sales of motor vehicles to households had also fallenover recent months. Some part of the slowdown in retail and motor vehicle spending in New SouthWales was likely to have been related to declines in housing prices and, in particular, lowerturnover in the housing market. Members noted that retail sales growth had not slowed to thesame extent in Victoria despite similar declines in housing prices.
In contrast to the slowdown in GDP growth, conditions in the labour market had continued toimprove. The national unemployment rate had been steady at 5.0 per cent in January, but had fallen to around 4 per cent in trend terms in New South Wales. Theunemployment rate in Victoria had also declined to low levels, while the unemployment rate inWestern Australia had increased in recent months to be around 6½ per cent. Theheads-based underemployment rate had declined in trend terms to be around its mid-2014 levels.Employment had increased by 0.3 per cent in January and by 2.2 per cent overthe preceding 12 months, which was well above growth in the working-age population. The numberof full-time jobs had increased strongly in January, following a couple of months of smalldeclines, and employment-to-population ratios had increased across most age categories. Membersnoted that both outcomes were consistent with strong labour market conditions. The participationrate had been stable at a high level. Overall, leading indicators continued to suggest thatemployment growth was likely to remain above average, although some indicators had turned down alittle recently.
Growth in the wage price index (WPI) had been broadly as expected in the December quarter, andunchanged at 2.3 per cent over the year. Year-ended wages growth in the private sectorhad picked up to its fastest pace in four years. Members noted that this increase was morepronounced once bonuses and commissions were included. Wages growth had been higher than a yearearlier in most industries and states. The strongest growth in wages had been in Victoria, at2.7 per cent, consistent with the decline in the unemployment rate as well asrelatively stronger public sector wage outcomes in that state. Growth in the WPI in WesternAustralia had remained low at 1.6 per cent over the year. Western Australia was theonly state where year-ended wages growth had remained below 2 per cent. By industry, wages growth had been relatively weak in the retail, construction and professional, scientific &technical industries, consistent with information from micro-level WPI data that wage freezeshad been more common in these industries in recent years than had been the case previously.
Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of financial market developments by noting that globalfinancial conditions had generally eased in prior weeks, reflecting the recent moderation inmarket expectations for future central bank policy rates, some optimism around US–China tradenegotiations and resilience in corporate earnings. The easing in financial conditions had alsobeen seen in Australian markets. Members observed that overall financial conditions remainedaccommodative globally and in Australia.
Expectations for monetary policy in the advanced economies had been little changed over themonth, following the downward shift in policy expectations around the turn of the year. FederalOpen Market Committee (FOMC) officials had continued to state that, with the federal funds rateclose to estimates of neutral, they will be patient in making any changes to policy and will beclosely guided by incoming data. Members noted, however, that some FOMC officials had continuedto indicate that US monetary policy might need to be tightened further. Financial market pricingindicated that the next move in the federal funds rate was expected to be down, although notuntil late 2020 or early 2021. Members noted, however, that this might reflect marketparticipants' views that risks had become more skewed to the downside, rather than that aninterest rate reduction was the most likely outcome.
Financial market pricing continued to indicate that accommodative monetary policy was expectedto be maintained in the euro area and Japan for some time, with central bank officials havingrecently noted a weakening in the outlook for economic activity and inflation in thoseeconomies.
In Australia and New Zealand, financial market pricing indicated that policy rates were expectedto be lowered by early 2020, following the earlier shift from expected future increases inpolicy rates.
Members noted that long-term bond yields in the major global markets remained below their levelslate in 2018, consistent with the more subdued outlook for inflation and the lowering ofexpectations for future policy rates in the major advanced economies. Australian long-term bondyields had declined further in February, in line with the shift down in policy expectationsfollowing the previous meeting, to be at their lowest levels since late 2016. As a result, government bond yields in Australia had moved further below those in the United States. InChina, long-term government bond yields had also declined over recent months in the context ofthe easing in financial conditions by the authorities.
Global equity markets had rebounded over the first two months of 2019, following a sharp fall inlate 2018. Members observed that these swings in equity prices had been driven largely byshifting risk premiums, and had been disproportionate to the changes in corporate earnings. Inthe United States, share prices were now only 4 per cent below the peak of 2018. InAustralia, on an accumulation basis (which takes account of dividend payments) share priceindices were back to around their 2018 peak. Chinese share prices had risen particularlystrongly since the start of 2019 – most likely reflecting optimism aroundUS–China trade negotiations and recent and expected future policy easing – but hadunderperformed relative to other markets over the preceding year.
Forecasts for corporate earnings in 2019 in the major markets, as well as in Australia, had beenlowered in recent months, consistent with the downward revisions to the outlook for growth andinflation in several economies. Nevertheless, some growth in earnings was still expected inAustralia and abroad. Underlying profits for listed companies in Australia had been littlechanged in the second half of 2018. Profits in parts of the resources sector had been supportedby higher commodity prices, while profits in sectors exposed to property had tended to decline.
Members noted that the easing in global financial conditions had also been evident in corporatebond spreads, which had declined recently, and that corporate bond yields had remained close tohistorically low levels.
In China, growth in total social financing had increased a little in recent months, afterdeclining steadily over the preceding year. The slowing in growth in total social financingsince late 2017 had reflected policy measures to reduce non-bank lending activity, which hadbeen an important source of funding for private firms, in order to reduce overall risks in thefinancial system. More recently, the pace of contraction in non-bank lending had abatedsomewhat, as the authorities wanted to ensure financing was readily available for smallerprivate firms. Growth in corporate bond issuance had also picked up over the preceding year.Members noted that the Chinese authorities were continuing to balance their priorities ofsupporting growth while addressing financial stability risks.
Financial conditions in other emerging markets had continued to ease, after tightening over2018. Equity prices had unwound some of their earlier falls and the increase in bond spreads hadalso been partly retraced. Exchange rates of emerging market economies had stabilised, andappreciated in some cases, and inflows of foreign capital had resumed. Policy adjustments insome economies, as well as the easing in global financial conditions and associated depreciationin the US dollar, had contributed to the easing in financial conditions in emerging markets.
In foreign exchange markets, members noted that the Chinese renminbi had appreciated slightlysince late 2018. The Australian dollar had been broadly steady over preceding months andremained within the relatively narrow range of recent years.
Turning to domestic financial markets, members noted that growth in housing lending toowner-occupiers had slowed to 5 per cent in six-month-ended annualised terms, whilegrowth in lending to investors in housing had stabilised at a rate of around 1 per cent.Housing loan approvals data indicated that the slowing in housing lending growth had beenlargely accounted for by the major banks, but members noted that, more recently, loan approvalsby other smaller lenders had also declined.
Liaison with banks and other lenders suggested that the requirements for more thoroughverification of income and expenditure data had led to an increase in loan approval times in2018, but subsequent investments in people and technology had reduced approval times. Thetypical time from application to approval was reported to be currently around one week. It wasreported that approval times for loans for house and land packages remained significantly longer(closer to around one month) than for loans for established property, because of carefulmanagement of the greater risks involved in this form of lending. Overall, liaison with lenderssuggested that loan approval rates were little changed and that reduced demand from borrowers, particularly investors, largely explained the slower growth in lending.
Nevertheless, members noted that there had been some reduction in the supply of credit aslending practices had been tightened over the previous year. Members discussed a number ofadditional factors that could influence credit supply in 2019, including: the MelbourneInstitute's household expenditure measure, which plays some role in lending assessments, hadincreased by more than it had in recent years; tighter lending policies on debt-to-incomeratios; and the broadening of comprehensive credit reporting, which might reveal under-reportingof applicants' other liabilities. While these factors could affect the maximum amountoffered to a borrower, only a small proportion of borrowers borrow up to their limits.
Members noted that banks continued to compete for borrowers of high credit quality by offeringlower interest rates on new loans than those offered on existing loans.
Growth in business credit had remained robust, with both the major banks and other lendershaving contributed to the growth over the preceding year, although the major banks account for asmaller share of business lending than before the onset of the global financial crisis. Membersobserved, however, that the growth in business lending had been entirely to large businesses, with one estimate suggesting that lending to small businesses had declined slightly over thepreceding year. There had been greater caution around lending to small businesses in response tothe Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial ServicesIndustry. Lower housing prices had also reduced the value of collateral for loans to smallbusinesses.
Members noted that interest rates in the Australian short-term money market had recentlydeclined from the persistently high levels around the turn of the year, in line withdevelopments in international markets, although they remained a little above their levels ofearlier years. Members had a detailed discussion of the Bank's operations in repurchase andforeign exchange swap markets and their role in achieving the Board's target for the cashrate. Banks' longer-term funding costs had declined a little over recent months, consistentwith lower long-term government bond yields, even though spreads on bank bonds had increasedover the preceding year. Overall, the marginal cost of banks' wholesale funding had declineda little from 2018 levels, to be only slightly higher than in 2017. At the same time, the majorbanks' retail deposit rates had continued to drift down.
Financial market pricing implied that the cash rate was expected to remain unchanged during2019, but that a reduction in the cash rate was expected by early 2020.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members observed that growth in the global economyhad been above trend in 2018, although it had slowed over the second half of the year and timelyindicators suggested that this moderation had extended into 2019. Nonetheless, output growth hadremained sufficient in most advanced economies for labour markets to remain tight, puttingupward pressure on wages. Members noted the tension in a number of economies between slower GDPgrowth and resilient labour markets. The transmission of tighter labour market conditions toinflation pressures was taking longer than might be expected, based on historical experience.
The authorities had responded to slowing growth in China by putting in place policies toincrease the flow of credit to the private sector and easing fiscal policy in a targeted way tosupport growth, while continuing to pay close attention to risks in the financial sector.Slowing growth in China and ongoing trade tensions had led to lower growth in global trade, andcontinued to be a source of uncertainty for the outlook for global growth.
The tightening of global financial conditions, associated with higher risk premiums required byinvestors around the turn of the year, had eased. Members assessed that global financialconditions remained accommodative, with financial market pricing indicating that little changeto the accommodative stance of monetary policy in the advanced economies was expected over thefollowing year or so. The terms of trade for Australia were expected to have remained abovetheir trough in early 2016 and the Australian dollar had remained within its narrow range ofrecent times.
Domestically, there continued to be tension between the ongoing improvement in labour marketdata and the apparent slowing in the momentum of output growth in the second half of 2018.Leading indicators of conditions in the labour market, such as vacancies and hiring intentions, pointed to further tightening in the labour market in the near term. Private sector wages growthhad picked up further in the December quarter, consistent with the Bank's forecasts andsurvey evidence that a significant share of firms were finding it difficult to attract suitablelabour.
Although output growth had slowed in the second half of 2018, the outlook for businessinvestment and spending on public infrastructure had remained positive. Growth in consumptionwas expected to be supported by an increase in growth in household disposable income. However, there continued to be considerable uncertainty around the outlook for consumption given theenvironment of declining housing prices in some cities, low growth in household income and highdebt levels. Dwelling investment was expected to subtract from growth in output over theforecast period and, unless pre-sales volumes started to increase, this decline could be sharperthan currently expected.
The process of adjustment in the housing market had continued. Housing prices in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth had declined further, and turnover in the housing market had fallensignificantly. Rent inflation had remained low across most of the country despite declines inrental vacancy rates over the previous year, except in Sydney, where rental vacancy rates hadbeen increasing. Credit conditions had tightened for some borrowers and the demand for housingcredit had slowed noticeably as conditions in the housing market had changed. Mortgage rates hadremained low and there was strong competition for borrowers of high credit quality.
Members noted that the sustained low level of interest rates over recent years had beensupporting economic activity and had allowed for gradual progress to be made in reducing theunemployment rate and returning inflation towards the midpoint of the target. While the labourmarket had continued to strengthen, less progress had been made on inflation. Looking forward, the central forecast scenario was still for growth in GDP of around 3 per cent over2019 and a further decline in the unemployment rate to 4¾ per cent over thenext couple of years. This further reduction in spare capacity underpinned the forecast of agradual pick-up in wage pressures and inflation. Given this, members agreed that developments inthe labour market were particularly important.
Taking account of the available information on current economic and financial conditions and howthey were expected to evolve, members assessed that the current stance of monetary policy wassupporting jobs growth and a gradual lift in inflation. However, members noted that significantuncertainties around the forecasts remained, with scenarios where an increase in the cash ratewould be appropriate at some point and other scenarios where a decrease in the cash rate wouldbe appropriate. The probabilities around these scenarios were more evenly balanced than they hadbeen over the preceding year.
Members agreed to continue to assess the outlook carefully. Given that further progress inreducing unemployment and lifting inflation was a reasonable expectation, members agreed thatthere was not a strong case for a near-term adjustment in monetary policy. Rather, they assessedthat it would be appropriate to hold the cash rate steady while new information became availablethat could help resolve the current tensions in the domestic economic data. Members judged thatholding the stance of monetary policy unchanged at this meeting would enable the Bank to be asource of stability and confidence, and would be consistent with sustainable growth in theeconomy and achieving the inflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 1.5 per cent.