Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 5 October 2021
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Jonathan Kearns(Head, Financial Stability Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the recovery ineconomic activity in advanced economies had continued in recent months. High vaccination rates hadallowed restrictions on activity to be eased, which was supporting business conditions and, in turn, thedemand for labour. Labour shortages were being reported in some countries, constraining hiring andboosting wages growth in certain industries, including in customer-facing areas such as hospitality.Labour force participation was still well below pre-pandemic levels in a number of large advancedeconomies, including the United States, the euro area and the United Kingdom. With students physicallyreturning to school and health concerns abating, members thought it would become clearer in coming monthswhether workers had left the labour force temporarily or permanently.
Members noted that patterns in wages growth differed across advanced economies. Some economies that wereexperiencing a pick-up in wages growth, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, were also thosethat had experienced relatively fast wages growth and higher inflation prior to the pandemic. Employmentwas still well below pre-pandemic levels in these countries. In New Zealand, wages growth had also pickedup in prior months, which was consistent with the Reserve Bank of New Zealand's assessment that sparecapacity had largely been absorbed. The more modest wages growth in Canada and the euro area wasconsistent with ongoing spare capacity in labour markets in these economies.
Members noted that the combination of strong demand for goods globally, supply bottlenecks and risingenergy prices had caused measures of producer price inflation to increase to their fastest rate in manyyears. The prices of energy‐related commodities, including liquefied natural gas (LNG) and thermal coal, were well above the levels prevailing at the start of the year; this reflected low inventories and strongdemand, including from a weather-related boost to electricity production in the northern hemisphere andstrong global goods production. Coal and LNG prices had also been supported by supply disruptions inEurope and Asia.
The pass-through of higher producer price inflation to underlying consumer price inflation had variedacross countries. Increases in consumer price inflation had been most apparent in some large emergingmarket economies. Headline consumer price inflation in advanced economies remained high, thoughunderlying measures of inflation had not risen to the same extent. Most central banks in advancedeconomies had continued to characterise pandemic-related price increases as either temporary or one-offprice level changes that would have only a transitory effect on inflation.
Members discussed the slowing in economic activity in China over recent months, including the role ofpolicies to reduce overall debt levels and emissions, as well as the effects of the pandemic. Thepreviously announced caps on Chinese steel production and concerns about excess leverage in China'sproperty sector had put further downward pressure on iron ore prices. However, onshore coal prices hadsurged as a result of strong demand, low inventories and domestic supply disruptions. More generally, members noted that renewed focus in China on achieving ‘common prosperity’, combined with arange of regulatory actions, had created more uncertainty about the medium-term outlook for policysettings and the economy in China. Some observers had interpreted these developments as an attempt tocurtail the influence of the private sector, while others saw it more as the next stage of long-runningstrategies to reduce poverty and corruption and to promote social fairness.
Elsewhere in east Asia, economic conditions had been adversely affected by surges in COVID-19 cases and the reintroduction of containment measures through July andAugust. However, rising vaccination rates and declining case numbers in recent weeks had allowed forrestrictions to be eased. Growth in goods exports continued to be very strong among the moreexport-oriented economies, with surveyed manufacturing conditions remaining strong in all the advancedAsian economies.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy and the outlook, members noted that the rapid increase in vaccinations, particularly in states with outbreaks of the Delta variant of COVID-19, would see restrictions on activity eased sooner than previously expected. The international border wasalso set to begin reopening earlier than had been assumed. In addition, the publication of roadmaps bysome states had provided more clarity over the sequencing and pace of economic reopening. Informationfrom the Bank's liaison program indicated that many firms were preparing for the lifting ofrestrictions, and timely indicators of household spending and hiring intentions suggested the recovery inactivity and employment would be well under way by the end of the year. Members noted that surveys ofbusiness and consumer sentiment had been fairly resilient during the recent lockdowns. In the centralscenario, the economy was expected to have returned to its pre-Delta path by the second half of 2022.Nonetheless, members acknowledged that the recovery was likely to be uneven across the economy and thatuncertainty would be a feature of the outlook for some time yet.
Timely data on mobility and spending indicated that consumption had stabilised in the latter part of theSeptember quarter, following the sharp contraction beginning in June. The household saving ratio wasexpected to have increased sharply in the quarter, with lockdowns limiting households' ability topurchase many goods and services (particularly discretionary services). At the same time, pandemicassistance payments by the Australian Government and state and territory governments had supported theincomes of households that had experienced job losses or whose members were working reduced hours. Thelifting of restrictions in New South Wales and Victoria was expected to lead to a solid recovery inhousehold consumption in the December 2021 and March 2022 quarters. This would be supported by highaccumulated savings, strong increases in household wealth and a rebound in employment. Even so, households' consumption of discretionary services was not expected to return to pre-pandemic levelsuntil 2022.
Members observed that national housing market conditions remained very strong, with established housingprices continuing to rise rapidly. In Sydney, where private property inspections had been permitted, thevolume of transactions remained relatively high. Meanwhile, in Melbourne, new listings and transactionvolumes had declined significantly following the imposition of tighter restrictions on in-personinspections. Approvals for new dwellings, as well as for alterations and additions, had remained highacross the country despite the end of the HomeBuilder application period. This was supporting the largepipeline of residential construction activity, which was expected to support dwelling investment over thefollowing year despite some delays from disruptions in the September quarter. Approvals for privatenon-residential buildings had also increased in prior months, led by the office and industrial sectors, which was expected to support construction activity in the period ahead.
Members noted that restrictions on activity continued to have a significant effect on the labour market.Total hours worked had declined further in August to be 4 per cent below their June level. InNew South Wales, hours worked had fallen by 13 per cent since June. The decline in employmenthad been more moderate, indicating that many employees had worked reduced hours but had not lost theirjobs during the recent lockdowns. This included a large number of people who had been stood down on zerohours. The participation rate had declined further in August (reflecting a very large decline in NewSouth Wales) as many of the people who had ceased being employed were classified as having left thelabour force rather than as unemployed. As a result, the unemployment rate had been little changed at4.5 per cent. Broader measures of labour underutilisation, which captured people working zeroor reduced hours and net flows out of the labour force, had increased sharply since the middle of theyear.
Forward-looking indicators of labour demand had been much more resilient than they had been during thelockdowns in 2020. The overall level of job advertisements remained high. There were indications thatsome firms in New South Wales were preparing to step up hiring ahead of the easing of restrictions inOctober. In addition, information from the liaison program continued to suggest that firms affected bythe lockdowns had been reluctant to lay off staff given their experiences with labour shortages andstrong labour demand prior to the Delta outbreak. Members noted that the central forecast scenarioenvisaged the level of employment, unemployment and participation to have broadly recovered to pre-Deltalevels by around the end of the year, although there was considerable uncertainty around this projection.
In discussing the ongoing modest wages growth in Australia, members noted that the recent lockdowns andearlier reports of labour shortages had not appeared to affect most firms' expectations for wagesgrowth, which were generally returning to around pre-pandemic norms. While reduced labour forceparticipation had seen some countries experience wage pressures before employment had returned topre-pandemic levels, this was not the case in Australia. Even in industries that had experienced stronglabour demand, wages growth remained subdued. In reviewing wages growth across different types ofwage-setting arrangements, members noted that a small share of people on individual agreements hadreceived larger wage increases over recent quarters, in part reflecting earlier wage cuts that had beenreversed. Overall, there were few indications from disaggregated wages data or from the Bank'sliaison program to suggest that aggregate wages growth was likely to accelerate sharply in the periodahead.
Members concluded their discussion of domestic economic developments by observing that underlyinginflation pressures in Australia were more moderate than in other advanced economies. This reflected arange of factors, including the relatively slow rate of wages growth in Australia. Members noted that, while it was possible that underlying inflationary pressures in Australia could build more quickly thancurrently envisaged, the central forecast scenario was still that domestic inflation would pick up onlygradually over the medium term.
International financial markets
Members commenced their review of developments in international financial markets with a discussion ofEvergrande, a large private Chinese property developer. Recent developments in Evergrande's financialposition had led to a decline in risk sentiment across global financial markets in September. WhileEvergrande is small relative to the financial system in China, members noted a financial stability riskfrom spillovers to other developers and financiers if the resolution of Evergrande's problems were tobe disorderly. Some other property developers had also experienced restrictions on their ability toborrow under China's ‘three red lines’ policy because they had some combination of highleverage, high gearing or low liquidity ratios. Members noted that a deterioration in confidence indevelopers could see a sharp withdrawal of credit provided to the sector and a decline in pre-sales, placing them under further stress. However, sharp price movements had so far been limited toEvergrande's own bond and equity prices, along with those of some other Chinese property developersand the equity prices of a small number of banks with large exposures to Evergrande. Broader financialconditions in China had been stable, aided by liquidity injections from the central bank. Chineseauthorities had also taken a number of steps to support credit growth to smaller private enterprises, which had slowed in recent months. The renminbi exchange rate had remained around its highest level inrecent years.
Central banks in advanced economies had continued to provide significant policy stimulus. Some centralbanks had begun to reduce the extent of their policy stimulus, or were expected to do so over the comingyear as the economic recovery progressed. Members noted that central banks' policy decisions had beeninformed by how close they were to achieving their policy goals. Although inflation had been abovecentral banks' targets in most advanced economies and energy prices had risen noticeably in precedingmonths, inflationary pressures were generally expected to ease over time as supply constraints wereresolved. Even so, inflationary pressures had been more persistent than previously expected in somecountries, including the United States and the United Kingdom, and the rate of wages growth had picked upnoticeably in some countries. This had led to an increase in long-term government bond yields and upwardrevisions in the path for policy rates implied by market pricing.
The Bank of Korea and Norges Bank had already increased their policy rates, and market pricing impliedthat the Reserve Bank of New Zealand was expected to increase its policy rate in the coming days. Marketparticipants expected the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada to cease net purchases of governmentbonds by the end of 2021. Persistent inflationary pressures related to rising energy prices and labourshortages had brought forward the timing of the Bank of England's first policy rate increase impliedby market pricing to early 2022. The US Federal Reserve (Fed) had indicated that it was likely to beginmoderating the pace of its asset purchases in November, with an intention to cease net purchases bymid 2022. Market pricing implied that the Fed could start raising its policy rate in late 2022 orearly 2023, consistent with the ‘dot plot’, which summarises Federal Open Market Committeeparticipants' outlook for the federal funds rate.
Financing conditions for businesses in advanced economies had remained very favourable. Equity markets hadremained close to recent highs, despite declines over the preceding month in response to concerns aboutthe Chinese property sector and the rise in sovereign bond yields in advanced economies. Corporate bondspreads had remained low.
The Australian dollar had depreciated since mid 2021, to be around 3 per cent lower on atrade-weighted basis than at the start of the year. The depreciation from the middle of the year had beenconsistent with the decline in yields on Australian government bonds compared with those of other majoradvanced economies and, more recently, concerns around slowing momentum of the Chinese economy.
Members discussed the shift in Australia's balance of payments, including the large current accountsurplus. They noted the decline in private investment as a share of GDP following the mining investmentboom and the large increase in private savings during the pandemic.
Domestic financial markets
The Bank's policy measures continued to underpin very low domestic interest rates. Members noted that, following the Board's decision in the previous month to proceed with the reduction in the pace ofbond purchases to $4 billion per week, and to maintain this pace until at least mid February 2022, bond yields had declined slightly and the Australian dollar exchange rate had depreciated a little.Subsequently, yields had risen, broadly in line with those in the United States. Market pricing impliedthat the first increase in the cash rate was expected around the end of 2022.
Banks' funding costs and outstanding lending rates had continued to drift down to new lows. New loanswere being taken out at historically low rates, and existing borrowers were benefiting from refinancingat lower available rates. Loan commitments had remained high in August and growth in housing credit hadpicked up further in six-month-ended terms. Growth in business debt had picked up over recent months tothe fastest pace since prior to the global financial crisis. This growth had been driven by largebusinesses, with debt of small businesses little changed in recent months. While banks had been open toproviding loan payment deferrals to borrowers affected by lockdowns, take-up by households and small andmedium-sized businesses had been very modest, in stark contrast to the experience of 2020.
Financing conditions in bond markets remained very favourable. Members observed that bank bond issuancehad picked up a little in prior months, after having been subdued while banks drew down on the three-yearfunding provided by the Term Funding Facility. Issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities hadalso been strong, with the highest quarterly amount issued since the financial crisis. Corporate bondspreads remained very low, and corporate debt issuance had been robust.
Australian equity prices had declined over the preceding month, but remained close to recent highs. Pricesof mining stocks had declined noticeably, following the sharp drop in iron ore prices, while stocks ofcompanies exposed to travel had picked up as plans for the reopening of borders became clearer.
Financial stability
Members were briefed on the Bank's regular half-yearly assessment of financial stability risks.
Banks in advanced economies continued to be well capitalised, with ample liquid assets, and remained ableto support the economic recovery. Profitability of large banks had increased, in part because newprovisions for loan losses had fallen sharply and some banks had reduced their existing provisions forloan losses. Banks' capital ratios had increased with the higher profitability; Common EquityTier 1 ratios were around 60 to 140 basis points higher than a year earlier, in partreflecting restrictions on capital distributions imposed by regulators during 2020. Given the improvementin economic conditions in advanced economies, regulators had begun to remove these restrictions oncapital distributions and reduce regulatory relief. Many large banks had announced share buyback plansand increased dividends.
In China, authorities had continued to balance addressing increased financial system vulnerabilities withavoiding a realisation of those vulnerabilities that would sharply lower economic growth. This trade-offhad been a feature of the significant focus on the liquidity crisis facing Evergrande. More generally, the number of adjustments to policy occurring simultaneously had increased the potential for unintendedoutcomes.
In some emerging market economies, output remained below pre-pandemic levels, reflecting pre-existingmacroeconomic and financial imbalances as well as lower vaccination rates and increases in COVID-19 cases, which had curtailed economic activity. These economies couldface capital outflow and exchange rate depreciation if their interest rates did not increase alongsidethe increases expected in advanced economies; however, higher interest rates in emerging market economieswould risk further delaying the economic recovery. Either sharp capital outflow and exchange ratedepreciation or a sharp fall in output could trigger financial instability in these economies.
Low long-term sovereign interest rates and optimism about business incomes had contributed to high pricesof financial assets and increased risk-taking. Some asset prices did not appear to reflect the risk toeconomic activity still presented by the pandemic. There could be widespread asset price falls if therewere sharp increases in risk premiums or risk-free interest rates from unexpected inflation.
In many economies, there had been further significant rises in housing prices over the preceding sixmonths. Low interest rates, in combination with strong household balance sheets as a result of limitedconsumption opportunities and government transfers, had contributed to these price rises. Regulators insome countries had indicated that housing prices had risen beyond the level suggested by theirfundamental determinants, although in many countries growth in housing prices appeared to have peaked.Housing credit had grown faster than incomes in a number of countries and housing credit growth wasaround post-2008 highs in Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States. Some regulatorshad highlighted high household indebtedness and/or a rise in risky lending as a vulnerability, andmacroprudential policies had been tightened in Canada, South Korea and New Zealand.
In Australia, households' balance sheets had strengthened over the first half of 2021, prior to thelockdowns brought on by the outbreak of the Delta variant of COVID-19.Households had been using accumulated higher savings to make excess home loan repayments into redraw andoffset facilities. But there had also been a substantial rise in other deposits. Growth in householdborrowing had increased, with aggregate household debt growing faster than income.
Housing loan commitments had increased strongly in the first half of 2021, but had declined slightly sincemid year. Recent levels of loan commitments suggested that housing credit growth could reach asix-month-ended annualised rate of around 10 per cent by early 2022. Lending standards hadremained sound, although the share of lending at high debt-to-income ratios had increased.
Given the build-up of risks associated with high and rising household indebtedness, the AustralianPrudential Regulation Authority (APRA) had been in close consultation with the Bank and other agencies ofthe Council of Financial Regulators about an appropriate macroprudential policy response. Analysissuggested that these risks would be best addressed with a serviceability-based macroprudential measure, which would ensure that borrowers would have more income left over after home loan repayments and otherexpenses. Other options that could be used to improve borrowers' buffers would be portfoliorestrictions on individual lenders' shares of lending at high debt-to-income ratios and/or highloan-to-valuation ratios. APRA was scheduled to publish a macroprudential policy framework paper later inthe year, which would outline the objectives for macroprudential policy, as well as the broad range oftools available to address different risks and how they could be implemented. The Bank would also shortlypublish a special chapter on macroprudential policy in the October Financial StabilityReview.
Business balance sheets were generally in a good position prior to the outbreak of the Delta variant. Mostbusinesses had increased their liquidity buffers over 2020, with low interest rates providing support.Government payments and other measures, such as loan deferrals and rent moratoria, had also boosted cashflows for firms adversely affected by lockdowns. In aggregate, profits had increased in the first half of2021 as the economy rebounded strongly; however, some firms were vulnerable as the ongoing restrictionshad constrained their activity and, as a result, insolvencies were likely to rise.
The Australian financial system remained resilient. The loan-to-valuation ratios on most outstanding homeloans meant that banks would be well protected against even large housing downturns. Expectations ofheightened losses across all loans, which were formed early in the pandemic, were now unlikely to berealised. As a result, banks had started to release provisions, although at a gradual rate because of theuncertainty around the effects of the recent lockdowns. These factors had contributed to an increase inprofits over the first half of 2021, which had returned to pre-pandemic levels. An increase in netinterest margins had also contributed. Australian banks' capital ratios were well above regulatoryrequirements and were expected to remain above those requirements even after increased dividends andshare buybacks.
Other risks to the Australian financial system continued to require ongoing vigilance. In particular, risks from IT systems remained acute and, in recognition of this, financial regulators had been workingwith financial institutions to bolster their cyber resilience. Financial institutions and regulators werealso continuing to work on managing financial risks from climate change.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the outbreak of the Delta variant of COVID-19 had interrupted the recovery of the Australian economy and theavailable data pointed to a material decline in GDP in the September quarter. However, the setback wasexpected to be only temporary, with the economy anticipated to bounce back as vaccination rates continueto rise and restrictions are eased. In the central scenario, the economy would return to growth in theDecember quarter and to its pre-Delta path in the second half of 2022. Members also observed that theeconomic recovery was likely to be slower than in late 2020/early 2021. Much would depend on healthoutcomes and the nature and timing of the easing of restrictions on activity.
Wage and price pressures in Australia remain subdued. Members noted that while disruptions to globalsupply chains were affecting the prices of some goods, the effect of this on the overall rate ofinflation in Australia was limited. Wages growth and underlying inflation were expected to pick up onlygradually as the economy recovers.
The Bank's package of policies – including record low interest rates, the bond purchase program, the yield target and the funding provided under the Term Funding Facility – was providingsubstantial and ongoing support to the Australian economy. Borrowing rates were at record lows, sovereignbond yields were at very low levels and the exchange rate had depreciated over prior months. The fiscalresponses by the Australian Government and the state and territory governments had also been providingwelcome assistance to household and business balance sheets.
Housing prices and credit growth had continued to rise strongly at a time of historically low interestrates, with strong demand for credit by both owner-occupiers and investors. Given the environment ofrising housing prices and low interest rates, members continued to emphasise the importance ofmaintaining lending standards and agreed that loan serviceability buffers were appropriate. Members alsoagreed that, while less accommodative monetary policy would, all else equal, see lower housing prices andcredit growth, it would result in fewer jobs and lower wages growth, which would in turn create furtherdistance from the goals of monetary policy – namely, full employment and inflation sustainablywithin the target range.
The Board remained committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve a return tofull employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. It will not increase the cash rateuntil actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. The centralscenario for the economy is that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting this condition willrequire the labour market to be tight enough to generate materially higher wages growth than at the timeof the meeting.
The decision
The Board decided upon the following policy settings:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlementbalances of zero per centmaintain the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bondcontinue to purchase government securities at the rate of $4 billion a week until at least midFebruary 2022.