Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 5 September 2023
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Iain Ross AO, Elana Rubin AM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others present
Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Marion Kohler (Acting AssistantGovernor, Economic)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Deputy Secretary)
Penelope Smith (Head, International Department), Tom Rosewall (Acting Head, Economic AnalysisDepartment), Carl Schwartz (Acting Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by observing that headline inflation hadcontinued to ease in year-ended terms in most economies because food and energy commodity prices weregenerally lower than they had been a year earlier. More recent increases in some food and energy pricespresented upside risks to headline inflation in the months ahead. Nevertheless, many central banks inadvanced economies expected inflation to moderate further and return to target during 2025.
Members noted that core inflation remained more persistent than headline inflation in advanced economies, though it had eased in many owing in part to a decline in core goods price inflation. By contrast, coreservices inflation remained high in most advanced economies, supported by the recent strength in demandrelative to supply and strong growth in unit labour costs. Labour market conditions had eased graduallybut remained tight, and unemployment rates were still at very low levels.
Economic growth in advanced economies had slowed in response to cost-of-living pressures and tightermonetary policy, but by less than previously expected. Growth in household consumption had slowed in theJune quarter in many advanced economies and timely indicators suggested the slowing had continued intothe September quarter. Business investment growth had picked up in recent quarters in a number ofadvanced economies. Activity in the services sector – which had been a key driver of growth ineconomic activity in the first half of 2023 – appeared to have lost some momentum in precedingmonths.
Members discussed recent developments in China, observing that conditions in the property market haddeteriorated further and that other indicators of economic activity had remained soft. Chineseauthorities had introduced several policy measures to support the property sector, but these had not yetmaterially changed buyer sentiment. Members noted that the sector faced significant challenges fromfinancial stress among developers and further defaults posed a risk to economic activity. Inflation inChina remained very low by global standards and relative to the central bank’s target. A sharperslowing in China was a risk to the global outlook, as Chinese policymakers navigated the longer termchallenges of slower structural growth and a rebalancing of the sources of growth in the Chinese economy.
Despite problems in the property market in China, members observed that iron ore prices had increased overthe prior month, supported by ongoing demand for steel from other sectors and the possibility of furtherpolicy support. Oil prices had increased by nearly 20 per cent from their trough in late June, with larger increases for refined fuel prices.
Members noted that the numbers of tourists and students entering Australia from China had continued torecover but were not yet back to pre-pandemic levels; therefore, further increases were expected tosupport growth in Australian services exports in the near term. However, a sharper deterioration inChina’s economic growth posed a downside risk to the outlook for services exports and would also beexpected to reduce the prices received for Australia’s commodity exports. Lower output growth inChina would also affect global output growth, which might in turn affect a range of Australian exports aswell as the prices of Australia’s imports. However, if this downside risk were to eventuate, theseeffects would likely be partly offset by a depreciation of the Australian dollar.
Domestic economic conditions
Turning to the domestic economy, members observed that inflation had continued to decline from its peak inlate 2022 but remained high. Headline inflation, as measured by the monthly CPI indicator, had decreasedto 4.9 per cent over the year to July, owing to declines in the prices of fruit and vegetablesand fuel. However, fuel prices had increased sharply in August. By itself, this would boost headlineinflation in the September quarter, relative to expectations in early August. Overall, however, inflationwas still expected to continue to moderate over the second half of 2023.
Members discussed the composition of the latest inflation data, noting that inflation excluding volatileitems and holiday travel and accommodation had eased further in July. The earlier easing in globalupstream cost pressures, alongside slowing growth in domestic demand, had contributed to lower inflationfor a range of goods. As expected, electricity prices had increased markedly in July as the higherdefault market offers came into effect, with some offset from government rebates. Members noted thatthere was limited additional information available for services inflation in the first month of eachquarter. Rent inflation had increased to 7½ per cent over the preceding year, reflecting verytight rental market conditions across the capital cities.
Members noted that the labour market also remained tight, but a little less so than in late 2022. Whilethe unemployment rate remained around the low levels of the preceding year, broader measures of labourunderutilisation had increased a little and a range of indicators suggested the labour market was at aturning point. The easing in labour market conditions had reflected both an easing in growth in labourdemand (following slower growth in economic activity) and strong growth in labour supply. Firms in theBank’s liaison program had reported an improvement in labour availability but that finding suitableworkers continued to be more difficult than prior to the pandemic.
Wages growth remained solid in the June quarter. The Wage Price Index increased by 3.6 per centover the year, broadly around the same pace as in the March quarter. Members noted that timely indicatorsalso pointed to wages growth having been steady ahead of the implementation from July of the changes toaward and minimum wages decided by the Fair Work Commission (FWC). The liaison measure of private sectorwages growth was around 4 per cent in the September quarter to date, although it was too soonto assess the overall effect of the FWC wage decision on wages growth overall. Expectations of firms inthe liaison program were for wages growth in the year ahead to remain around 4 per cent.
Members observed that a range of timely indicators suggested economic growth remained weak. Cost-of-livingpressures and high interest rates had continued to weigh on growth in real household disposable incomesand consumption. The national accounts, which were scheduled to be released the day after the meeting, were expected to show that growth in consumption was weak in the June quarter. In per capita terms, consumption was expected to have declined. Timely indicators suggested that consumption growth hadremained weak into the September quarter. Looking through the recent monthly volatility, retail sales hadbeen little changed in nominal terms since late 2022 but remained well above pre-pandemic levels in bothnominal and real terms.
The recovery in housing prices had continued over the prior month, supported by strong demand –driven in part by strong population growth – and limited supply. Increases in prices had beenbroadly based across regions and property types; in Sydney, prices were around 8 per cent abovetheir early-2023 trough. The rental market was also very tight and would likely remain so owing to strongpopulation growth, but there had been some tentative signs of an easing in conditions. Rental vacancyrates had increased slightly in some capital cities in recent months and, although growth in advertisedrents (for new leases) had remained strong in most capital cities, it had slowed in most regional areas.
Demand for new residential construction had remained weak. In liaison, builders had pointed to a range offactors, including higher interest rates, higher construction costs and the effect of construction delaysand insolvencies on buyer sentiment. Members noted that the recent weakness in demand for new detacheddwellings was expected to weigh on dwelling investment once the construction backlog had been workedthrough. Private residential construction work done had declined slightly in the June quarter, suggestingthere had been limited easing of capacity constraints associated with finishing trades. Contacts inliaison reported that build times had improved modestly in preceding months and anticipated that theywould return to more typical levels in 2024.
Members observed that business conditions had been relatively stable at around average levels in precedingmonths. Business investment was expected to have increased solidly in the June quarter. That said, inliaison, firms’ investment intentions for the coming year had softened a little, driven by a rangeof factors including a slowing economy.
International financial markets
Members commenced their discussion of conditions in international financial markets by reviewing recentdevelopments in China. Financial pressures on property developers had intensified during August. Propertysales had fallen further during the month, to be around the level of a decade earlier. The equity andbond prices of property developers had declined sharply as weakening demand for new property continued toweigh on earnings. Notably, one of China’s largest property developers was restructuring its onshoredebt and had failed to make timely payments on its offshore debt. Given the levels of stress in thesector, further defaults were widely expected.
Members noted that stress in China’s property sector had potential implications for the broadereconomy and financial system there. Households in China hold a significant share of their wealth inhousing assets, and weakness in the property sector may be affecting households’ confidence andspending. Additionally, land sales to property developers are an important source of income for localgovernments, whose finances are already stretched. China’s shadow banking sector also hassignificant exposures to the property sector, and a large financial services provider had missed paymentson several trust products in August. Authorities had made some adjustments to policies in response to thestress, including by further easing home buyer purchase restrictions and extending some existing supportmeasures, but these had not yet had a discernible effect.
The People’s Bank of China had eased monetary policy a little further in August in response toslowing economic activity. Chinese Government bond yields had declined and the Chinese renminbi haddepreciated to its lowest level since late 2022. Members noted that authorities in China had stepped uptheir efforts to limit the speed of exchange rate depreciation and deter speculation in the currency.
In advanced economies, expectations for central bank policy rates had been little changed over the priormonth, with most advanced economy central banks either at or nearing the expected peaks implied by marketpricing. Longer term sovereign bond yields of advanced economies had increased and yield curves hadsteepened. Longer term market-based inflation expectations had remained stable against a backdrop ofmoderating headline inflation. Equity prices in major markets had been little changed. Corporate bondspreads had declined over preceding months, reflecting both expectations that central bank policy rateswere near their peaks and an easing of concerns about the likelihood of a recession.
The Australian dollar had depreciated over the prior month, reflecting concerns about the outlook for theChinese economy and a broad appreciation of the US dollar as US Treasury yields increased.
Domestic financial markets
Members observed that market expectations for the cash rate had declined over the prior month or two, ashad market economists’ expectations. This followed the Board’s decision to hold the cash ratesteady at its August meeting and the slightly weaker-than-expected domestic data over the prior month, aswell as the economic and financial news from China.
Members noted that the average outstanding mortgage rate in Australia was now higher than in several otherpeer economies, despite the policy rate in Australia being somewhat lower; this reflects the higher shareof variable-rate mortgages in Australia and shorter maturity of fixed-rate loans. As such, the householdcashflow channel of monetary policy for borrowers is more pronounced in Australia than in many othercountries. Scheduled mortgage payments rose to 9.7 per cent of household disposable income inJuly, a little above the estimated previous historical high. Members noted that aggregate payments wereset to increase further as more borrowers with fixed-rate loans roll off onto higher rates.
Credit growth had stabilised over prior months, having slowed earlier in the year. New housing loancommitments had declined in June and July to be almost 30 per cent below their peak in January2022. New commitments as a share of housing credit were at low levels, consistent with large increases inmortgage rates and declines in housing prices since the start of the tightening period. However, housingloan commitments were 6 per cent higher than in February this year, consistent with the reboundin housing prices over that period. Investors accounted for about two-thirds of the rise in commitmentsover prior months, as commitments for owner-occupiers had risen only slightly.
Members observed that current market pricing implied no expectation of a change in the cash rate at thismeeting, and around a 40 per cent chance of one further increase by the end of 2023. Marketeconomists had also revised lower their expectations for further increases in the cash rate this year;the average expected peak in the cash rate had declined from 4.45 per cent prior to the Augustmeeting to around 4.3 per cent subsequently. The number of economists no longer expecting afurther increase in the cash rate had risen.
Considerations for monetary policy
In turning to the policy decision, members noted that inflation was still too high and was expected toremain so for an extended period. The experience in other countries continued to suggest that servicesprice inflation might take some time to decline. Members also observed that the data received on wagesover the prior month had been broadly consistent with the Bank’s forecasts; the labour marketremained tight but conditions were easing.
Members noted that the economy was experiencing a period of subdued growth. This was being led byhousehold consumption, as high inflation weighed on household incomes and the effects of prior tighteningin monetary policy worked their way through the economy. The outlook for the Chinese economy had alsobecome more uncertain over the prior month, and there were several channels through which this couldaffect Australia.
Members noted the decline in market expectations for the peak in the cash rate since the previous meeting.At the same time, longer term yields in advanced economies had risen, suggesting investors had becomemore confident that inflation could return to target without a sharp slowing in the economy. Members alsoobserved that housing prices in Australia had continued to increase, as strengthening demand frominvestors offset still-subdued demand from owner-occupiers.
In light of these observations, members considered two options for monetary policy at this meeting:raising the cash rate target by a further 25 basis points; or holding the cash rate target steady.
The case to raise the cash rate further was based on the expectation that inflation will remain above theBank’s target for a prolonged period and the risk that this period might be extended. This couldoccur if productivity growth does not pick up as anticipated or if high services price inflation is morepersistent than expected. Members observed that, were inflation to remain above target for an even longerperiod, this could cause inflation expectations to move higher, which would be likely to require an evenlarger increase in interest rates in the future. Such an outcome would be costly for the economy. Membersnoted that the recent rise in petrol prices – an important input for households’ inflationexpectations – highlighted that the process of returning inflation to target could be uneven.
The case to hold the cash rate unchanged at this meeting was based on the observation that interest rateshad been increased significantly in a short period, and that the effects of tighter monetary policy wereyet to be fully realised. While evidence suggested interest rates were working to bring aggregate demandinto closer alignment with aggregate supply, lags in the transmission of monetary policy meant that thefull effects of the tightening since May 2022 would take time to be apparent in the data.
Members noted that there was a risk the economy could slow more sharply than forecast. Consumption couldbe weaker than expected, and the downside risks to the Chinese economy had increased. On balance, though, members concluded that recent developments had not materially altered the outlook or their assessmentthat the economy still appears to be on the narrow path by which inflation comes back to target andemployment continues to grow.
In weighing up the two options, members agreed that the case to keep the cash rate target unchanged atthis meeting was the stronger one. The recent flow of data was consistent with inflation returning totarget within a reasonable timeframe while the cash rate remained at its present level. Membersrecognised the value of allowing more time to see the full effects of the tightening of monetary policysince May 2022, given the lags in the transmission of policy through the economy.
In reaching this decision, members noted that some further tightening in policy may be required shouldinflation prove more persistent than expected. In assessing the need for such a move, members affirmedthat they will be guided by the incoming data and how these alter the economic outlook and the assessmentof risks. In making its decisions, the Board will continue to pay close attention to developments in theglobal economy, trends in household spending and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. Membersreaffirmed their determination to return inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe and theirwillingness to do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
The decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.1 per cent, and the interest rateon Exchange Settlement balances at 4 per cent.