Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 6 April 2021
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Jonathan Kearns (Head, FinancialStability Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Penny Smith (Deputy Head, Financial Stability Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments with a cross-country review ofeconomic activity and developments in labour markets during the pandemic. A recurring theme was thatAustralia had fared relatively well in terms of output levels and labour market outcomes. The Decemberquarter 2020 national accounts showed that GDP in Australia had recovered to close to pre-pandemiclevels, whereas GDP was still considerably below pre-pandemic levels in many other countries. The lossof output over 2020 as a whole had also been smaller in Australia than in many other countries. Thisreflected both the relatively smaller initial decline in output in Australia and the swift recoverysince then.
Turning to labour market outcomes, members noted that most countries had experienced a largecontraction in both employment and labour force participation since the pandemic. Australia'sexperience had been unusual in that employment and participation were now higher than the levelsprevailing at the end of 2019. Favourable health outcomes in Australia, the design of the JobKeeper andother temporary support programs and the swift recovery in activity had all contributed to a strongbounce-back in the domestic labour market.
Despite the rapid recovery in employment in Australia, members noted that wages growth domesticallyhad slowed to a greater extent and had been more subdued than in other countries. The labour marketadjustment in Australia in response to the pandemic had principally taken the form of adjustment tohours worked and widespread wage restraint. In contrast, in some other countries, including the UnitedStates, the adjustment had mainly been through a decline in employment.
Members discussed cross-country differences in population growth stemming from international borderclosures. In some countries, including Canada, which had experienced high and rising rates ofimmigration in the years prior to the pandemic, population growth had slowed substantially. In NewZealand, some of the slowdown in population growth had been mitigated by the return of expatriate NewZealand citizens during the pandemic; in turn, it was likely that this had contributed to the increasein housing demand in New Zealand. The decline in population growth in Australia had been particularlysteep relative to other countries; in the 3 months to September, the Australian population haddeclined for the first time in several decades as a result of a reversal in net overseas migration.However, in countries where net migration had contributed less to population growth in the years beforethe pandemic, including the United States, population trends had been little changed in recentquarters.
Members observed that corporate profitability during the pandemic had varied considerably acrosscountries. The size and composition of fiscal support for the corporate sector had contributed much tothis outcome. In the euro area and the United Kingdom, subsidy payments had not offset the effect onbusiness profits of the decline in output. In Australia, business profits had increased in 2020 asoutput had fallen by less than elsewhere and fiscal support had been targeted more towards wagesubsidies than loan guarantees. The JobKeeper program had been particularly supportive of industrieswhere labour costs comprise a high share of the total cost base.
Members concluded their discussion of recent international developments by noting that the globaleconomic outlook remained more positive than a few months earlier, although the near-term outlook hadbecome more variable across countries. This partly reflected cross-country differences in infectionsand progress with vaccine rollouts. The outlook for growth in the United States had improved andinflation was expected to be a little higher as a result of the size and composition of fiscal stimulusthere. While a more positive outlook in the United States would support global growth, the outlook forother advanced economies was less positive as the decline in output in 2020 had been more significant, less fiscal stimulus had been provided and some countries were still contending with lockdowns. As aresult, substantial spare capacity was likely to persist in most advanced and emerging economies. Inturn, this was likely to keep inflationary pressures well contained, despite the rebound in commodityand other input prices in recent months.
Domestic economic developments
Members noted that the strong recovery in the Australian economy had continued into 2021. TheAustralian economy grew by 3.1 per cent in the December quarter, following the3.4 per cent rebound in the September quarter. This meant that GDP was around1 per cent below its December 2019 level at the end of 2020. Consumption had continued torecover in the December quarter despite a decline in household income. Growth in business and dwellinginvestment had been stronger than expected, supported by targeted fiscal measures. Exports had beensupported by a sharp jump in rural production following the return of more favourable weatherconditions. Public investment had increased in the December quarter, but by less than anticipated.Indications at the time of the meeting were that the rollout of public investment programs over thefirst half of 2021 would be slower than foreshadowed in state budgets. Overall, preliminary datasuggested that GDP in the March quarter was likely to have recovered further to around its pre-pandemiclevel, earlier than previously expected.
Members discussed the unusual behaviour of household disposable income during 2020. Growth in incomeshad been particularly strong in the June and September quarters of 2020, as fiscal transfers such associal assistance and subsidy payments had more than offset the declines in labour and financialincome. Part of this increase in household disposable income had been unwound in the December quarter, and further declines were expected over the first half of 2021 as fiscal transfer payments and othertemporary support measures expired.
Households appeared to have smoothed their spending through a period where household income haddeclined. Timely indicators suggested that growth in household consumption had moderated in the Marchquarter following the strong rebound over the second half of 2020. Short, sharp lockdowns in severalstates in the early months of 2021 were likely to have had a relatively minor effect on consumption, and the recovery in spending on services evident in the December quarter appeared to have carried overinto subsequent months. Despite this recovery, consumption was still likely to have been a little belowits pre-pandemic level in the March quarter, in part because of some continuing restrictions onactivity and the international border remaining closed.
Members noted that reduced uncertainty and higher net wealth for many households were likely tosupport the recovery in consumption in the period ahead. However, much would depend on the extent towhich households consume or invest the savings accumulated in 2020. Survey data suggested that incomeand savings had increased for most household income groups, with most of the additional saving beingundertaken by higher-income households. This was partly because higher-income households spend more onthe types of discretionary services that had been unavailable during the pandemic. Fiscal programs hadalso supported the incomes of self-employed people and business proprietors.
Turning to the labour market, members noted that both the initial increase and the subsequent declinein the unemployment rate had been much sharper than observed during the economic downturns of the 1980sand 1990s. This was likely to limit the longer-term scarring effects that had hampered the recovery inlabour market conditions following those downturns.
Members discussed the strength in the recent run of labour market outcomes. Employment had returnedto pre-pandemic levels considerably faster than expected. There had also been a shift in growth frompart-time to full-time employment. Forward-looking indicators of labour demand had remained strong, with job vacancies and advertisements above pre-pandemic levels, and employment intentions trendinghigher. This partly reflected the need for firms to rehire for positions vacated during the pandemicand a period of catch-up in hiring that had been delayed in 2020. These indicators suggested that atleast some of the job losses that were likely to follow the end of the JobKeeper program would beoffset by new hiring. As a result, while the overall recovery in the labour market was expected topause in the period ahead, this was expected to be only temporary. Members also noted it was likelythat the full effect of the end of the JobKeeper program would become apparent over severalmonths.
Members noted that housing prices had increased significantly in recent months. Growth in housingprices had been especially strong for detached housing, particularly in outer metropolitan and regionalareas. This had partly reflected strong demand from first-home buyers and owner-occupiers seeking morespace. The momentum in housing price increases had broadened recently to include the largest capitalcities and the more expensive segments of these markets, although the increase in overall housingprices in Australia during the pandemic had been more modest than in a number of other countries.Members noted that low interest rates had been one of the factors contributing to the increase indemand for housing, alongside other policies such as government grants. Advertised rents had alsopicked up in a number of capital cities recently, although, as in other countries, housing prices hadincreased by more than rents. Rents and overall conditions in the apartment market in Melbourne, and toa lesser extent in Sydney, remained subdued as the reduction in net overseas migration was stilllowering demand.
International financial markets
Members commenced their discussion of developments in financial markets by noting that, over theprior month, long-term sovereign bond yields had risen further in the United States and theUS dollar had appreciated. This had been in response to an improved economic outlook, aided by therollout of vaccines and the passing of a large fiscal stimulus in the United States. In contrast, sovereign bond yields in most other advanced economies had been little changed or had even declined alittle. While bond markets had been strained in February and early March as bond yields rose rapidly, the stresses had not been as great as a year earlier and conditions had settled more recently. Globalfinancial conditions remained accommodative.
Much of the rise in sovereign yields since late 2020 had reflected investors revising up theirexpectations for inflation to be more consistent with central banks' inflation targets. Realyields had also risen at longer horizons. Members noted that this was consistent with guidance fromcentral banks that their policy settings would remain highly stimulatory until after inflation hadrisen in a sustained manner. The rise in inflation expectations had also been associated with marketsbringing forward their expectations for policy rate increases for a number of advanced economies;policy rates were expected to rise in early 2023 in the United States, Canada and New Zealand, and inlate 2023 or early 2024 in the United Kingdom. For New Zealand, this was a little later than had beenexpected prior to the Government's announcement of a range of measures to address upward pressureon housing prices.
While the rise in sovereign bond yields had lifted costs for issuers of corporate bonds, yields hadremained very low. Moreover, credit spreads had been little changed, suggesting no significant changesin the market's expectations for defaults, consistent with the more positive economic outlook.Meanwhile, corporate bond issuance had remained robust. At the same time, equity prices in advancedeconomies, including in Australia, had increased further.
Members observed that rising bond yields in advanced economies had led to tighter financialconditions in many emerging market economies (EMEs). Borrowing costs for governments had risen and afew central banks had lifted policy rates in response to rising inflation and the pressures of exchangerate depreciation, which had been significant for some EMEs. While most EMEs were expected to benefitfrom the improved outlook for advanced economies, some had much slower vaccine rollout programs andtheir economic recoveries had been slower; as a consequence, they were exposed to a prematuretightening in financial conditions. Members noted that financial markets in some EMEs, such as Turkeyand Brazil, had also been affected more by these developments than others because of pre-existingmacro-financial vulnerabilities. In contrast, financial conditions in China had remained accommodativeand largely unaffected by developments elsewhere.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, the Bank's policy measures continued to underpin low interest rates in thedomestic economy and support the availability of credit to households and businesses. Banks'funding costs and lending rates were at historic lows.
Yields on Australian government bonds had been little changed over the course of March, after a sharprise in yields through February. Market conditions had been strained immediately prior to the Marchmeeting, but had improved since then, in part owing to the Bank having brought forward purchases underthe bond purchase program. Market conditions had improved over the prior month and the 3-year yield hadsettled around 10 basis points, unwinding the earlier increase. Liquidity conditions in bondmarkets had improved, with bid-offer spreads narrowing for Australian Government Securities (AGS) andbonds issued by the states and territories (semis). Members observed that market pricing implied thatthe cash rate was expected to remain unchanged in 2021 and 2022, before rising to around 50 basispoints by the end of 2023. The Australian dollar had depreciated from its recent highs to be backaround its levels at the turn of the year.
Members noted that the first $100 billion phase of the bond purchase program was scheduled to becompleted in early April. At the end of the further $100 billion phase in September, the Bank wasprojected to own 30 per cent of the AGS market and 15 per cent of the semismarket.
In their discussion of financing conditions, members noted that demand for new business loansremained subdued.
Financial stability
Members were briefed on the Bank's regular half-yearly assessment of financial stabilityrisks.
Australian banks had remained resilient. The reforms that followed the global financial crisis hadresulted in the banks having high capital levels and substantially higher holdings of liquid assets.This had reinforced their ability to support their customers during the pandemic. Members noted thatsmaller banks had even higher capital ratios than the major banks. In addition, the banks had strongprofitability prior to the pandemic, which had enabled them steadily to increase their capital. Theirreturn on equity had dropped in the first half of 2020 as provisions had been increased to account forexpected higher loan losses, but profitability had increased in the second half of the year asexpectations of improved economic conditions resulted in lower provisions being added. Banks'non-performing loans had drifted up and were expected to increase further, but they had remained muchlower than the peak that followed the global financial crisis.
Members noted that banks have a sizeable refinancing task in 2023–24, with the maturing oftheir 3-year loans under the Term Funding Facility, but the banks were planning for this and there hadbeen strong demand for the smaller volume of wholesale debt that banks had issued recently.
Globally, most banks were also resilient, but there were exceptions. Some banks that had relativelylow profitability at the onset of the pandemic could struggle to generate sufficient capital to coverlosses, and therefore might curtail their lending. Moreover, in Europe the intertwined credit riskbetween banks and their home country sovereign had increased with banks holding more government debtand government-guaranteed bank loans. Provisioning was also lower for some European banks. Globally, cyber attacks were also a growing risk facing banks.
In Australia, household balance sheets were generally in a stronger position than a year earlier. Atan aggregate level, and for many individual households, debt had fallen relative to income. Growth inhousehold debt, while positive, had been less than the strong growth in income as a result of thegovernment policy response. Household savings had increased substantially, with households increasingtheir financial assets, particularly deposits. A sizeable share of these deposits was in mortgageoffset accounts, which increased the buffers available to households with a mortgage. An additionalsource of increased liquid asset holdings for households had been early withdrawals fromsuperannuation.
Members noted that business revenue had increased across all industries in the December quarter 2020, but revenue had declined over 2020 in industries most affected by the pandemic, especially arts andrecreation and those related to tourism. Businesses overall had increased their holdings of deposits, which would provide a buffer in the period ahead as government support payments are wound down.Insolvencies and firm closures in 2020 had been supressed by a range of support measures, includingstimulus payments, loan repayment deferrals, rent reductions and a moratorium on insolvencies. However, insolvencies and firm closures were expected to increase through 2021 as the support measures are wounddown.
In Australia, with the strong recovery in economic activity, income for most borrowers had recoveredto at least its level a year earlier. However, for some businesses and households, income remainedlower, which could lead to difficulties in making debt repayments.
In some other countries, particularly some EMEs where the recovery had been slower, aggregate incomeremained below pre-pandemic levels. With more households and businesses having lower income than whenthey borrowed, a larger share would struggle to make debt repayments, which would be likely to lead tolarger increases in non-performing loans. More generally, if the recovery in EMEs continued to lag thatin key advanced economies, they could experience capital outflow, exchange rate depreciation and risingdomestic interest rates as global yields increase. These factors would not only impede the economicrecovery, but could be a source of financial instability.
Globally, asset prices had been increasing given the low levels of interest rates. Housing prices, inparticular, had increased strongly in a number of countries in the latter part of 2020 and early 2021.Growth in housing credit had increased in a number of these countries, but it generally remained slowerthan growth in housing prices. In Australia, growth in both housing credit and housing prices hadpicked up, but to a lesser extent. Annualised growth in housing credit had been around4½ per cent over the 6 months to February, driven by demand from owner-occupiers.Demand for new housing finance had been strong, and the high level of loan commitments indicated thathousing credit growth was likely to increase in the months ahead. However, there was no notableevidence of a deterioration in housing lending standards. The share of loans with higherloan-to-valuation ratios had increased, but this was in part explained by the larger share offirst-home buyers. The share of loans with high debt-to-income ratios had been relatively stable.Members agreed that it would be important to watch carefully for increased risk-taking by lenders andany deterioration in lending standards and larger shares of higher-risk loans.
Members agreed to have a broader discussion of the implications of climate change for financialstability in coming months.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines was supporting the recovery of the global economy. While thepath ahead remained uneven, there were better prospects for a sustained recovery. Global trade hadpicked up and commodity prices were generally higher than at the start of the year. The global outlookremained dependent on responses to the pandemic and the risks of further outbreaks of COVID-19 infections, as well as on the significant fiscal and monetary supportaround the world. Inflation remained low and below central banks' targets in many economies.
Financial markets had responded to the positive news on vaccines and the additional fiscal stimulusin the United States. Sovereign bond yields had increased over recent months, including in Australia.This increase partly reflected inflation expectations lifting from near record lows to be closer tocentral banks' targets. The Australian dollar was around its level at the beginning of theyear.
The economic recovery in Australia was well under way and had been stronger than previously expected.There had been a welcome fall in the unemployment rate to 5.8 per cent in February, and thenumber of employed people had returned to the pre-pandemic level. GDP had increased by a strong3.1 per cent in the December quarter 2020, boosted by a lift in consumption as the healthsituation improved. The economic recovery was expected to continue, with above-trend growth forecast in2021 and 2022. Household and business balance sheets were in good shape overall and this was expectedto continue to support spending. An important near-term issue was how households and businesses wouldadjust to the tapering of several fiscal support measures. Members noted that there might be atemporary pause in the pace of improvement in labour market conditions.
Despite these generally positive developments, wage and price pressures had remained subdued and wereexpected to remain so for several years. The economy had been operating with considerable sparecapacity and the unemployment rate was still too high. It would take some time to reduce this sparecapacity and for the labour market to be tight enough to generate wage increases consistent withachieving the inflation target. It was likely that wages growth would need to be sustainably above3 per cent, which was well above its current level. While annual CPI inflation was expectedto rise temporarily to around 3 per cent around the middle of the year as a result of thereversal of some pandemic-related price reductions, in underlying terms inflation was expected toremain below 2 per cent over both 2021 and 2022.
Members noted that housing market conditions had strengthened further over preceding months, withprices rising in most markets. Growth in housing credit to owner-occupiers had risen, with strongdemand from first-home buyers. In contrast, growth in housing credit to investors had remained subdued.Given the environment of rising housing prices and low interest rates, the Bank would be monitoringtrends in housing borrowing and the maintenance of lending standards carefully.
Since the start of 2020, the Bank's balance sheet had increased by around $215 billion anda further substantial increase was in prospect. The initial $100 billion government bond purchaseprogram was almost complete and the second $100 billion program would commence the following week.Beyond this program, the Bank was prepared to undertake further bond purchases if doing so would assistwith progress towards the goals of full employment and inflation. $95 billion of low-cost fundinghad been accessed through the Term Funding Facility and a further $95 billion was available to bedrawn down under the facility until the end of June 2021. This low-cost funding would continue toprovide support through to mid 2024. The Board would consider extending the facility if there werea marked deterioration in funding and credit conditions in the Australian financial system. However, there were no such signs currently. Members noted that the Australian banking system, with its strongcapital and liquidity buffers, had remained resilient and was helping to support the economicrecovery.
The Board remains committed to the 3-year Australian Government bond yield target of 10 basispoints. The Bank had not purchased bonds in support of the 3-year yield target since late February.Later in the year, members would need to consider whether to maintain the April 2024 bond as the targetbond or shift the focus of the yield target to the November 2024 bond. If the Board were to maintainthe April 2024 bond as the target bond, rather than move to the next bond, the maturity of the yieldtarget would gradually decline until the bond matured in April 2024. In considering this issue, memberswould give close attention to the flow of economic data and the outlook for inflation andemployment.
The Bank's monetary policy settings had continued to support the economy by keeping financingcosts very low, contributing to a lower exchange rate than otherwise, encouraging the supply of creditto businesses and strengthening household and business balance sheets. Monetary and fiscal policy hadsupported the recovery in aggregate demand and the pick-up in employment. The Board remained committedto doing what it reasonably could to support the Australian economy, and would maintain highlysupportive monetary conditions until its goals were achieved.
Members affirmed that the cash rate target would be maintained at 10 basis points, and the rateof remuneration on Exchange Settlement balances at zero, for as long as necessary. They continued toview a negative policy rate as extraordinarily unlikely. The Board will not increase the cash rateuntil actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. For thisto occur, wages growth would need to be materially higher than it is currently. This would requiresignificant gains in employment and a return to a tight labour market. The Board does not expect theseconditions to be met until 2024 at the earliest.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.1 per centan interest rate of zero on Exchange Settlement balances held by financial institutions at theBanka target of around 0.1 per cent for the yield on the 3-year Australian Governmentbondthe expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small andmedium-sized businesses, with an interest rate on new drawings of 0.1 per centthe purchase of $100 billion of government bonds of maturities of around 5 to 10 yearsat a rate of $5 billion per week following the Board meeting on 3 November 2020the purchase of an additional $100 billion of government bonds when the existing bond purchaseprogram is completed in April 2021 at the same rate of $5 billion per week.