Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 6 August 2019
Members Present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Allan Moss AO, Catherine Tanna
Members granted leave of absence to Carol Schwartz AO in terms of section 18A of the Reserve BankAct 1959.
Others Present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary)
International Economic Conditions
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that global growth had remainedreasonable, having eased since mid 2018. Near-term indicators relating to trade, manufacturing andinvestment had remained subdued, although consumption growth had been relatively resilient, supported bystrong labour market conditions especially in the advanced economies. Despite wages growth havinggenerally trended higher over the preceding few years, inflation had remained below target in a range ofeconomies.
Growth in major trading partners was expected to slow a little in 2019 and 2020. This outlook had beenrevised down a little since the May Statement on Monetary Policy in light of the escalationof the US–China trade and technology disputes and the related weakness in indicators ofinvestment. Members noted the recent announcement by the US administration of a 10 per centtariff to be imposed on a further US$300 billion of Chinese exports to the United States. Furtherescalation presented a downside risk to the outlook, particularly if heightened uncertainty weighedfurther on business investment. Members noted that investment intentions had already eased significantlyin a number of economies, including the United States and the euro area, and investment had fallen in anumber of economies with a high exposure to international trade, including South Korea.
In China, a range of activity indicators suggested that domestic economic conditions had slowed furtherin the June quarter. Further monetary and fiscal stimulus measures had also been announced. Fiscalsupport had encouraged investment in infrastructure, while residential construction had continued togrow relatively strongly, which in turn had supported steel production. The outlook for the Chineseeconomy had been revised lower, largely because of the ongoing US–China trade and technologydisputes. Uncertainty about how these disputes would play out and how effective domestic policy measureswould be in supporting Chinese demand continued to be an important consideration for the global growthoutlook and, from an Australian perspective, the future demand for steel and bulk commodities.
The US–China disputes and the slowing in Chinese domestic demand had affected export andinvestment growth in the east Asian region. However, exports to the United States had increased for someeconomies in the region, including Vietnam, as a result of trade diversion. By contrast, growth inconsumption in the east Asian region had generally remained more resilient. Growth in output in Indiahad slowed and the outlook was weaker than previously forecast, largely because there had been lessfiscal support and trade tensions with the United States were emerging.
In the major advanced economies, risks to the outlook remained tilted to the downside, reflecting thetrade disputes. The US economy had continued to grow relatively strongly into the June quarter. This wasdespite the effects of the trade dispute on the manufacturing sector and on business investment moregenerally, partly because tight labour markets had supported strong consumption growth. Members notedthat the most recent round of tariff announcements would affect US imports of consumption goods fromChina and could boost US consumer prices to some extent. Further slowing in investment seemed likely asthe effect of earlier fiscal stimulus waned and the uncertainty related to the trade and technologydisputes persisted.
Weaker global trade and greater uncertainty had also affected growth in output in the euro area. Growthin Japan was expected to be boosted temporarily by spending brought forward ahead of an increase in theconsumption tax in October, although weaker external demand had weighed on export growth.
Commodity prices had generally fallen since the previous meeting, partly in response to the escalationof trade tensions in early August. After more than doubling in the first half of 2019, iron ore priceshad declined to be below US$100 per tonne. Coal and oil prices had also declined over the previousmonth. Rural commodity prices had been little changed. Members noted that the terms of trade forAustralia in the June quarter had been higher than expected.
Domestic Economic Conditions
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that GDP growth was expected to have been firmer in theJune quarter after three weak quarters. This was partly because resource exports had recovered fromearlier supply disruptions and mining investment was likely to be less of a drag on growth. Partialindicators suggested that consumption growth had remained subdued in the June quarter; the volume ofretail sales had been subdued and sales of new cars had declined. While dwelling investment was expectedto have declined further in the June quarter, public demand and non-mining business investment wereexpected to have continued to support growth.
Members observed that the lower near-term GDP growth forecast mostly reflected the fact thatconsumption growth had been weaker than expected over recent quarters. Members noted that consumptiongrowth per capita had been particularly weak recently. The forecast for GDP growth over 2019 had beenlowered to 2½ per cent. Growth was expected to pick up to 2¾ per cent over2020 and to around 3 per cent over 2021. This was supported by a range of factors, includinglower interest rates, tax measures, signs of an earlier-than-expected stabilisation in some establishedhousing markets, the lower exchange rate, the infrastructure pipeline and a pick-up in activity in themining sector.
Members noted that although the outlook for consumption remained uncertain, the risks around theoutlook were more balanced than they had been for some time. The low- and middle-income tax offset wasexpected to boost income growth, with a surge in the lodgement of tax returns since the end of June. Inaddition, signs of a recovery in some established housing markets suggested that the dampening effect ofdeclining housing prices on consumption could dissipate earlier than had previously been assumed.
The evidence that conditions in housing markets were showing signs of a turnaround had strengthened inJuly. In Sydney and Melbourne, housing prices had increased, housing turnover appeared to have reached atrough and auction clearance rates had risen further. Outside the two largest cities, housing marketconditions had shown tentative signs of improvement; prices had risen in Brisbane, while the pace ofdecline had slowed in Perth. Rental vacancies had been low in most cities except in Sydney, where theyhad risen further as new apartments were added to the rental stock.
Members observed that it could take some time for the stabilisation of conditions in the establishedhousing market to translate into a pick-up in construction activity. Indeed, leading indicatorssuggested that dwelling investment was likely to decline further in the near term. Residential buildingapprovals had declined further over May and June and were around their lowest levels in six years.Timely information from liaison contacts suggested that increased buyer interest had yet to translateinto more housing sales. However, members noted that signs of a turnaround in housing markets suggestedthere were some upside risks to dwelling investment later in the forecast period, particularly given theexpected strength in population growth.
Forward-looking indicators for business investment had been mixed. Survey measures of businessconditions had been less positive than a year earlier, especially in the retail and transport sectors, but generally had remained around average. By contrast, non-residential building approvals had trendedup in recent months and the pipeline of work under way was already quite high. There was also a largepipeline of private sector projects to build transport and renewable energy infrastructure, which wasexpected to support non-mining business investment.
Although mining investment had declined in the March quarter as large liquefied natural gas (LNG)projects approached completion, the medium-term outlook for mining investment had remained positive. Anumber of projects had been committed and others were under consideration, which would add to investmentin coming years if they went ahead. Members noted that the outlook for mining investment had not beenaffected by the recent elevated levels of iron ore prices. However, they observed that higher iron oreprices would add to government taxation revenues and boost household income and wealth through dividendsand the effect on share prices. At the margin, this could provide greater impetus to spending thancurrently assumed.
Resource exports had picked up during the June quarter as some supply disruptions to iron ore had beenresolved and LNG production had increased further. Resource exports were expected to contribute togrowth over the forecast period and the recent depreciation of the Australian dollar was expected tosupport further growth in service and manufacturing exports.
Members noted that recent labour market data had been mixed. The unemployment rate had remained at5.2 per cent for the third consecutive month, which was higher than had been expected in May.However, growth in employment had continued to exceed growth in the working-age population in the Junequarter and had been stronger than forecast in May. As a result, the employment-to-population ratio andthe participation rate had remained around record highs. Over the previous year, there had been aparticularly notable increase in the participation rates of women aged between 25 and 54 yearsand workers aged 65 years and over. Members noted that the increase in participation by olderworkers had more than offset any tendency for the ageing of the population to reduce aggregateparticipation in the labour force. Members discussed some of the factors that could be contributing tothese trends, including slow income growth, improvements in health and greater flexibility in the labourmarket.
Leading indicators implied a moderation in employment growth over the following six months: jobvacancies had declined slightly over the three months to May (but remained high as a share of the labourforce) and firms' near-term hiring intentions had moderated, to be just above their long-runaverage. The unemployment rate forecast had been revised higher, with the unemployment rate expected toremain around 5¼ per cent for some time before declining to about 5 per cent asgrowth in output picked up.
Members noted that the outlook for the labour market was one of the key uncertainties for theforecasts, with implications for growth in wages, household income and consumption. The outlook forwages growth had been revised a little lower because the outlook for the labour market suggested thatthere would be more spare capacity than previously thought. Private sector wages growth was expected topick up only modestly, while public sector wages growth would be contained by government caps on wageincreases. Members observed that the outlook for household consumption spending could be weaker ifhouseholds expected low income growth to persist for longer.
Members noted that the June quarter CPI had been largely as expected. Trimmed mean inflation hadincreased a little to 0.4 per cent in the June quarter, but had remained at1.6 per cent over the preceding year, consistent with the forecast in May. Headline inflationhad been 0.7 per cent (seasonally adjusted), partly because fuel prices had increased byaround 10 per cent in the June quarter; over the year, headline inflation had also been1.6 per cent. Overall, members noted that there had been few signs in the June quarter CPInumbers of inflationary pressures emerging.
Inflation in market-based services had remained steady, which was consistent with a lack of wagepressures in the economy. Inflation in the housing-related components of the CPI had been aroundhistorical lows. New dwelling prices had declined again in the June quarter, reflecting the use of bonusoffers and purchase incentives by developers to counter the weak housing conditions. Rent inflation hadbeen flat in the quarter in aggregate, but had fallen noticeably in Sydney, consistent with the risingvacancy rate; rent deflation had eased in Perth and had been steady in most other cities. Members notedthat low inflation in new dwelling costs and rents, which represent around one-sixth of the CPI basket, was likely to persist in the near term.
There had been an increase in inflation for retail items because there had been some pass-through ofthe exchange rate depreciation and the drought had boosted certain food prices. These effects wereexpected to dissipate if there was no further exchange rate depreciation, as is usually assumed in theforecasts, and once normal seasonal conditions returned. Inflation in the prices of administered itemsand utilities had remained well below typical increases recorded a few years earlier.
Inflation was expected to pick up more gradually than previously forecast because of subdued wageoutcomes and the evidence of spare capacity in the economy. The experience of other economies suggestedthat any pick-up in wages growth might take longer to translate into inflation than in the past.Underlying inflation and headline inflation were both expected to pick up to be a little above2 per cent over 2021, as spare capacity in the labour market declined and as growth increasedto run above potential. Members noted that there were downside risks to some individual CPI components.In the near term, electricity prices could grow at a below-average pace or even fall, and governmentcost-of-living initiatives could weigh on other items in the CPI basket. Inflation rates for both newdwelling prices and rents were also expected to remain low in the near term, but were more uncertaintowards the end of the forecast period.
Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of financial markets by noting that central banks in the majoreconomies had eased, or were expected to ease, policy settings in response to downside risks to growthand subdued inflation outcomes. Financial market volatility had increased recently from low levels, inresponse to the escalation of the trade and technology disputes between the United States andChina.
The US Federal Reserve lowered its policy rate target by 25 basis points in July. Market pricingsuggested that the federal funds rate was expected to decline by a further 100 basis points or soover the following year. The Federal Reserve noted that the US labour market had remained strong.However, it was perceived by members of the Federal Open Market Committee that there was room for someeasing of monetary policy given the implications of global developments for the US economic outlook andsubdued inflation pressures. Elsewhere, the European Central Bank (ECB) had foreshadowed additionalmonetary stimulus unless the outlook for inflation in the euro area improved. The ECB indicated that itcould expand its bond-buying program, among other measures, and market pricing suggested that the ECBwas likely to reduce its policy rate over the following months. Market participants were also expectingthe Bank of Japan to ease monetary policy further in the period ahead.
In response to the shift in the outlook for monetary policy, long-term interest rates had declined tohistorical lows in several markets, including in Australia. Yields on government bonds were negativefor a number of European sovereigns and Japan. In addition, corporate bond spreads were low globally, with a growing portion of corporate debt in the euro area trading at yields below zero. Membersdiscussed the implications of the low level of bond yields for corporate balance sheets andinvestment.
Global equity markets had declined sharply prior to the meeting, in response to the recent escalationof the trade and technology disputes. Nevertheless, equity market indices were still well above theirlevels earlier in the year, supported by lower bond yields and expectations that earnings growth wouldbe reasonable. During July, equity market indices in the United States and Australia had reached recordhigh levels.
In foreign exchange markets, prior to the meeting there had been an increase in volatility, from verylow levels, in response to the escalation of the trade and technology disputes. In particular, the yenhad appreciated against the US dollar while the Chinese yuan had depreciated. Members took note ofthe market commentary that the US and Japanese authorities could intervene in an effort to lower thevalue of their currencies. The Australian dollar had depreciated in recent times to be at its lowestlevel in many years.
In Australia, the reduction in variable mortgage rates had been broadly consistent with the reductionin the cash rate in June and July. The degree of pass-through of the cash rate reductions was alsocomparable to that observed over the preceding decade. Housing credit growth had declined in June, forboth owner-occupiers and investors. At the same time, however, loan approvals had picked up in June, which for investors was the first sizeable increase for some time. This was consistent with otherindicators suggesting that the housing market had stabilised over recent months. However, loanapprovals to property developers had remained subdued. Members also noted that access to finance forsmall businesses continued to be tight.
Banks' debt funding costs and borrowing rates for households and businesses were athistorically low levels. Rates in short-term money markets, bank bond yields and deposit rates had alldeclined to historically low levels. The proportion of bank deposits that attract no interest hadincreased marginally to be just under 10 per cent. Despite the low level of funding costs, banks' bond issuance remained subdued. This reflected slow credit growth, along with the banksincreasing their issuance of hybrid securities to fulfil new regulatory capital requirements. Membersalso noted that mergers and acquisitions activity had not been especially high, despite fundingconditions being very accommodative for large businesses.
Market pricing implied that the cash rate was expected to remain unchanged in August. A 25 basispoints reduction had been fully priced in by November 2019, with a further 25 basis pointsreduction expected in 2020. The low level of bond yields implied that the cash rate was expected toremain very low for several years.
Members reviewed the experience of other advanced economies with unconventional monetary policymeasures over the preceding decade. These measures comprised: very low and negative policy interestrates; explicit forward guidance; lowering longer-term risk-free rates by purchasing governmentsecurities; providing longer-term funding to banks to support credit creation; purchasing private sectorassets; and foreign exchange intervention. Members considered the key lessons from the internationalexperience, noting that a full evaluation could not be undertaken as many of these measures were yet tobe unwound. One key lesson was that the effectiveness of these measures depended upon the specificcircumstances facing each economy and the nature of its financial system. Some measures had beensuccessful in reducing government bond yields, which had flowed through to lower interest rates forprivate borrowers. Other measures had been effective in addressing dislocations in credit supply.Members noted that a package of measures tended to be more effective than measures implemented inisolation. Finally, it was important for the central bank to communicate clearly and consistently aboutthese measures.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
Turning to the policy decision, members observed that the escalation of the trade and technologydisputes had increased the downside risks to the global growth outlook, although the central forecastwas still for reasonable growth. Uncertainty around trade policy had already had a negative effect oninvestment in many economies. Members noted that, against this backdrop, the low inflation outcomes inmany economies provided central banks with scope to ease monetary policy further if required. Indeed, anumber of central banks had reduced interest rates this year and further monetary easing was widelyexpected. In China, the authorities had taken steps to support economic growth, while continuing toaddress risks in the financial system.
Overall, global financial conditions remained accommodative. Long-term government bond yields haddeclined further and were at record lows in many economies, including Australia. Borrowing rates forboth households and businesses were also at historically low levels and there was strong competition forborrowers of high credit quality. Despite this, demand for housing credit, particularly from investors, remained subdued, while access to credit for some types of borrowers, especially small businesses, remained tight. The Australian dollar had depreciated to its lowest level in recent times.
Domestically, growth had been lower than expected in the first half of 2019. Looking forward, growthwas expected to strengthen gradually, to 2¾ per cent over 2020 and to around3 per cent over 2021. This outlook was supported by a number of developments, including lowerinterest rates, higher growth in household income (including from the recent tax cuts), the depreciationof the Australian dollar, a positive outlook for investment in the resources sector, some stabilisationof the housing market and ongoing high levels of investment in infrastructure. Overall, the domesticrisks to the forecast for output growth appeared to be tilted to the downside in the near term, but weremore balanced later in the forecast period.
Employment growth had been stronger than expected and labour force participation had increased to arecord high. However, the unemployment rate had increased and there appeared to have been more sparecapacity in the labour market than previously appreciated, although there was uncertainty around theextent of this. The unemployment rate was expected to decline to around 5 per cent over thefollowing couple of years, consistent with the gradual pick-up in GDP growth. Wages growth had beensubdued and there were few signs of wage pressures building in the economy. Combined with thereassessment of spare capacity in the labour market, this had led to a more subdued outlook for wagesgrowth than three months earlier.
In the June quarter, inflation had been broadly as expected at 1.6 per cent. Members notedthat inflation had averaged a little below 2 per cent for a number of years. In the near term, there were few signs of inflationary pressures building, but, over time, inflation was expected toincrease gradually to be a little under 2 per cent over 2020 and a little above2 per cent over 2021.
Based on the information available and the central scenario that was presented, members judged itreasonable to expect that an extended period of low interest rates would be required in Australia tomake sustained progress towards full employment and achieve more assured progress towards the inflationtarget. Having eased monetary policy at the previous two meetings, the Board judged it appropriate toassess developments in the global and domestic economies before considering further change to thesetting of monetary policy. Members would consider a further easing of monetary policy if theaccumulation of additional evidence suggested this was needed to support sustainable growth in theeconomy and the achievement of the inflation target over time.
The Decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 1.00 per cent.