Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 6 June 2023
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Iain Ross AO, Carol Schwartz AO
Members granted leave of absence to Alison Watkins AM in accordance with section 18A of theReserve Bank Act 1959.
Others present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Acting Deputy Secretary)
Penelope Smith (Head, International Department), Carl Schwartz (Acting Head, Domestic Markets Department), Meredith Beechey Osterholm (Deputy Head, Economic Research Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that inflation in many economiesremained well above central banks’ targets. Although headline inflation had continued to decline asenergy prices fell and food price inflation eased, members noted that core inflation had remained stickyand shown little sign of easing. Services inflation, which had become the primary source of inflationarypressures across advanced economies, had continued at a high rate. This partly reflected strong wagesgrowth, which remained above rates consistent with inflation targets in many economies. This, incombination with subdued growth in labour productivity, had resulted in a rapid rise in unit labour costsover the preceding year. Members acknowledged the implications of this for Australia, given the highdegree of commonality in inflation experience globally since the pandemic. While central banks inadvanced economies expected inflation to return to target, most do not see this as likely to occur in thecoming year.
Members noted that economic growth in advanced economies was slowing gradually as contractionary monetarypolicy settings took effect. GDP in major advanced economies had risen only slightly in the March quarterand had declined in some euro area countries. Consumption growth had been subdued in the March quarterand indications were that this had continued into the June quarter. Business investment was yet tosurpass pre-pandemic levels in most advanced economies. Other indicators of economic activity had beenmore resilient in recent months. Housing prices appeared to have stabilised in several countries, following significant declines over 2022, and survey measures of business conditions pointed to servicessector activity having increased further in May.
In China, the growth momentum had waned in April after a strong bounce-back following the end of pandemicrestrictions and the reopening of the international border in late 2022. As a result, the strength of theeconomic recovery had become more uncertain than a month earlier. Retail sales and industrial productionhad declined markedly in April and conditions in the property market had deteriorated.
Members noted that the price of iron ore had been broadly stable over the prior month, despite the softrun of Chinese data. More broadly, the soft outlook for global growth had led to falls in a range ofcommodity prices since the start of the year. Bulk commodity prices had declined and were now close topre-pandemic levels. Prices of energy commodities had declined the most, with thermal coal and spotprices for liquified natural gas falling in response to relatively high levels of inventories and broaderconcerns about the outlook for growth. Oil prices had also fallen. If sustained, these declines wouldfurther dampen consumer price inflation globally over the second half of the year.
Domestic economic conditions
Members noted that growth in economic activity in Australia had slowed since mid-2022, as thepost-pandemic recovery in spending faded and the substantial tightening in monetary policy worked its waythrough the economy. The national accounts, to be released the day after the meeting, were expected toshow only modest growth. Members noted that the new policies announced in the Australian GovernmentBudget had not had a material effect on the staff forecasts for economic activity and inflation.
There was growing evidence that household consumption growth had been subdued in the first half of 2023.Retail volumes had declined in the March quarter, despite strong population growth, and liaison withretailers suggested that conditions had softened further in the June quarter. Growth in spending onconsumer services, including cafes and restaurants, had generally slowed but by less than other forms ofconsumption. Members discussed the significant financial pressure facing many households and the effectof this on communities and the economy as a whole. They also discussed the unevenness in householdspending, noting that some households had drawn on the substantial additional savings built up during thepandemic, while other households were facing considerable budget constraints.
National housing prices had increased in recent months and households’ expectations for future risesin housing prices had strengthened. Members noted that, if sustained, this would imply less of a drag onconsumption in the year ahead than had previously been envisaged. The increase had been broadly basedacross capital cities in May and was consistent with developments in a number of other countries. Membersdiscussed the reasons for the unexpected strength in housing prices. They noted that strong populationgrowth had supported demand for housing and that this was largely affecting the established housingmarket. Expectations that the interest rate cycle was near its peak might also have played a role. Ordersfor newly constructed housing remained weak and residential construction firms continued to report thathigh materials costs and shortages of skilled tradespeople were contributing to low margins and delays inwork being completed.
Members noted that the labour market remained very tight. Nonetheless, conditions had eased slightly, alongside slower growth in economic activity. Employment growth over the prior six months had been alittle less than growth in the working-age population over that period. Firms in the Bank’s liaisonprogram had reported some improvement in labour availability. Acknowledging that the monthly data arevolatile, members noted that the unemployment rate had ticked up to 3.7 per cent in April andthe number of people employed had been little changed.
A range of measures suggested that wages growth had been in the 3½ to 4 per cent range. The paceof increase in the Wage Price Index (WPI) had risen to 3.7 per cent over the year to the Marchquarter, broadly in line with earlier expectations. The average size of wage changes in the privatesector for those who received an increase had remained at around 4 per cent for the thirdconsecutive quarter. In the public sector, wages growth had picked up to 3 per cent and afurther increase was expected. Information from the Bank’s liaison program was also signalling thatfirms’ expectations were for wages growth to remain stable at around current levels over the yearahead.
The recent Annual Wage Review decision of the Fair Work Commission (FWC) had increased award wages by5.75 per cent. This was higher than the expectation embedded in staff forecasts and would adddirectly to WPI growth in the September quarter, relative to the prior forecasts. In addition to this, arange of public sector enterprise agreements were being negotiated and it appeared likely that some ofthese would contain wage rises of at least 4 per cent for the first year, followed by smallerincreases in subsequent years. Members observed that the FWC decision would support wages growth foraround 30 per cent of workers (but a significantly smaller share of the total wage bill) whosewages are either directly or indirectly affected by award rates. Recently struck enterprise bargainingagreements would similarly see wages growth for those on enterprise bargaining agreements rise fromcurrent levels. Members observed that it was understandable that the lowest paid workers would becompensated for high inflation, but that it would be concerning if wages across a broad range of jobswere to become implicitly indexed to high inflation.
Timely indicators pointed to a gradual easing in inflation in the June quarter. The monthly CPI indicatorfor headline inflation had increased to 6.8 per cent over the year to April, a little higherthan had been expected. However, this was partly due to the timing of price changes for volatile items, and growth in the indicator excluding volatile items and holiday travel had slowed, particularly insix-month-annualised terms. The easing in global upstream cost pressures and the more recent declines incommodity prices and shipping rates could be expected to lower firms’ costs, but the easing inconsumer goods price inflation had been limited. Members acknowledged that additional information on themomentum of services prices inflation would become available over subsequent months.
Members noted that there were various other considerations that created upside risk for inflation. Retailelectricity prices had risen over the preceding year, but – unlike in other countries – therewould be an even larger increase in the year ahead. Rent inflation had been high in April, reflectingvery tight rental market conditions across the capital cities, and appeared to be drifting up further.There had also not been as clear a moderation in goods price inflation in Australia as there had been insome other countries. In considering the outlook for inflation, members discussed the importance ofproductivity growth, noting that output per hour worked had not increased over the preceding three years.
International financial markets
Members commenced their discussion of international financial conditions by observing that the US FederalReserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, Norges Bank and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand(RBNZ) had increased policy rates further over the prior month to address high and persistent coreinflation. Some central banks, including the RBNZ, had communicated that policy rates were now likely tobe sufficiently restrictive or close to sufficiently restrictive. However, central banks had alsoemphasised that policy rates were unlikely to decline over coming months, in contrast to market-impliedexpectations.
Market expectations for the path of central bank policy rates had shifted higher over the prior month inresponse to stronger-than-expected inflation and labour market data. The suspension of the US debtceiling and easing of concerns about stress in some parts of the US banking system had also contributedto these moves.
Government bond yields in advanced economies had also increased over the prior month. Members noted thatthe increase in nominal yields mostly reflected higher real yields, while market measures of longer terminflation expectations remained anchored in most economies. This implied that markets expected centralbanks to raise policy rates sufficiently to return inflation to target.
Private sector financial conditions had been little changed. US funding markets had stabilised after thebanking stress in March and deposit outflows from banks had slowed. Members noted that US banks’funding costs were likely to remain under pressure for some time, particularly for smaller banks.
In China, financial conditions had remained accommodative, with bond yields having declined a little inresponse to concerns around the strength of the economic recovery and expectations of further policyeasing. Credit growth had eased alongside a slump in property sales and many highly leveraged propertydevelopers continued to face considerable financial stress.
The Australian dollar had ended the month little changed on a trade-weighted basis. Members observed thatthere had been two countervailing forces on the exchange rate over preceding months. Interest ratedifferentials between Australia and major advanced economies had generally been supportive, and membersnoted that the Australian dollar had appreciated noticeably in response to the decision to raise the cashrate in May. Meanwhile, the decline in commodity prices and concerns about the strength of China’seconomic recovery had weighed on the value of the Australian dollar.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that increases in the cash rate continued to be passed through to higher lending rates.Scheduled mortgage payments had increased further and equated to around 9 per cent of householddisposable income in April. The increase in average variable mortgage lending rates over the tighteningphase had been less than the rise in the cash rate, reflecting competition in the banking sector. Therewere, however, some signs that competition for borrowers had started to ease. The continuing rollover oflow fixed-rate loans into higher rate loans would contribute to a further increase in scheduled paymentsover the months ahead. Members noted that, based on increases in the cash rate to date, payments wereprojected to rise to the equivalent of around 10 per cent of household disposable income by theend of 2024.
Net flows into borrowers’ offset and redraw accounts remained positive to April, although extramortgage payments were well below the highs seen during the pandemic. Increases in scheduled mortgagepayments would reduce some borrowers’ ability to make these extra payments, but higher rates werealso creating an incentive to hold savings in these accounts. The value of non-performing housing loanshad risen a little but from a very low level. Measures of personal insolvencies also remained at lowlevels.
Members observed that new housing loan commitments had stabilised over preceding months, followingdeclines of around 30 per cent from the peak in early 2022. Commitments had steadied among bothowner-occupiers and investors, and across states. This pattern was consistent with housing prices havingsteadied after prior declines. Housing credit growth was also showing signs of levelling out after aperiod of deceleration.
Members noted that the decision to increase the cash rate in May had been unexpected by many marketparticipants and contributed to bond yields in Australia rising by around 30 basis points over theprior month. For the June meeting, markets were pricing in about a 50 per cent chance of anincrease in the cash rate and a little less than half of market economists expected an increase. Theseexpectations had increased over the prior week, following the release of the monthly CPI and theFWC’s decision. Further ahead, around half of economists surveyed expected 50 basis points oftightening by August, which was broadly in line with the probability implied by market pricing.
Considerations for monetary policy
In turning to the policy decision, members noted that inflation had passed its peak but remained wellabove target and was forecast to return to the top of the target range only by mid-2025. There was littlespare capacity in the economy, with the unemployment rate very low. At the same time, members noted thatconsumer spending had softened significantly, with both higher interest rates and high inflation weighingon household purchasing power. Members observed that the economy still looked to be traversing a narrowpath on which inflation comes back to target while the unemployment rate rises but remains low. Theynoted that there were significant risks and uncertainties to staying on this path.
Members discussed two options: increasing the cash rate by 25 basis points; or holding the cash rateunchanged.
The case for raising the cash rate by a further 25 basis points focused on the increased risk thatinflation would take longer to return to target than had been expected. Members observed that inflationwas already projected to be above target for a number of years and was expected to take somewhat longerto return to target in Australia than in some other countries. This extended timeframe reflected theBoard’s desire to bring inflation down while, at the same time, preserving as many of the gains inemployment as possible. While this remained the Board’s objective, members noted that a moreprolonged period of above-target inflation would increase the risk that firms’ and households’expectations for inflation rise. If this occurred, high inflation would become more persistent with theresult that interest rates would need to be higher for longer. This would increase the risk of a sharprise in unemployment.
In discussing the risks to the inflation outlook, members observed that the monthly indicator of headlineinflation had surprised on the upside in April and that the decline in goods price inflation had beenless than observed in other countries. In addition, services price inflation had not yet shown signs ofmoderating and the evidence from abroad suggested that it may prove to be persistent.
Members noted that wages growth was still consistent with the inflation target, provided productivitygrowth picked up to around the average pace that had been recorded before the pandemic. While futuretrends in productivity were uncertain, the outcomes over recent times had been disappointing. Membersdiscussed the possibility of implicit indexation of wages to past high inflation and the potential forthis to become widespread. Similarly, members observed that some firms were indexing their prices, eitherimplicitly or directly, to past inflation. These developments created an increased risk that highinflation would be persistent, which would make it more difficult to keep the economy on the narrow path.
Members observed that the resumption of growth in housing prices would – if sustained – implyless drag on consumer spending in the coming year than had been envisaged. Members also noted that thestabilisation in housing loan approvals suggested that financial conditions may not have been as tight asthey had previously judged. The downside risks to global growth had also abated a little as conditions inthe US banking sector had stabilised.
Members concluded that these developments had shifted the balance of risks on inflation to the upsidecompared with a month earlier, although they also noted that there were some downside risks to inflation, including from developments in global markets and the slowdown in household spending in Australia.
The case for holding the cash rate unchanged at this meeting rested on the slowing in the economy and thepossibility that the significant increases in interest rates to date would lead to the economy slowingmore sharply than expected. Members noted that consumption growth was already quite weak, especially inper capita terms. Real disposable incomes were falling, especially for home loan borrowers, and manyrenters were experiencing difficult financial conditions. Members also noted that the scale of increasein the cash rate over the preceding year, lags in the transmission of monetary policy through the economyand the large number of fixed-rate loans scheduled to expire over coming months would see financialconditions tighten further. Given these developments, there was a risk of the economy slowing andunemployment rising by more than expected.
Members also discussed some of the downside risks to inflation. They observed that commodity prices hadfallen quite significantly over preceding months, as had the price of international shipping, which couldbe expected to reduce pressure on consumer prices over time. Members noted that medium-term inflationexpectations in financial markets had been little changed to date and that the moderation occurring inheadline inflation could mitigate the risk of inflation expectations rising. They also observed that thestaff forecasts had overestimated wages growth for a prolonged period prior to the pandemic and thatproductivity could prove stronger than expected.
In light of these considerations, members discussed the possibility of holding the cash rate unchanged atthis meeting and then reconsidering at subsequent meetings, with the benefit of additional data.
Members recognised the strength of both sets of arguments, concluding that the arguments were finelybalanced. They judged, though, that the case to raise the cash rate at this meeting was the stronger one.
The Board affirmed that its priority is to return inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe. Therecent data suggested that inflation risks had shifted somewhat to the upside. Given this shift and thealready drawn-out return of inflation to target, the Board judged that a further increase in interestrates was warranted. This increase would provide greater confidence that inflation would return to targetover the period ahead. An extended period of high inflation would distort the economy and exacerbatecost-of-living pressures, hurting those on low incomes the most. Sustained high inflation would also leadto even higher interest rates in the future and a worse outlook for the labour market.
In taking the decision to increase interest rates again, members acknowledged the considerable uncertaintyregarding the outlook for household spending and the financial stresses facing some households. Giventhis, they agreed to continue to monitor trends in household spending closely and consider theimplications for the inflation outlook, as well as developments in the global economy and the domesticlabour market. Members reaffirmed their determination to return inflation to target and their willingnessto do what is necessary to achieve that.
Members agreed that the Governor’s speech the following day would provide an opportunity to explainthe decision in more detail.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 4.1 per cent andto increase the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to4 per cent.