Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 6 July 2021
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Mark Chambers (Senior Manager, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler(Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the globaleconomic recovery was well under way and that risks to the outlook had become more evenly balanced.Policy settings remained highly accommodative. The rollout of vaccinations had been progressing well inmany advanced economies and some large emerging market economies, although in some countries progress hadbeen hindered by limited supplies, logistical issues and vaccine hesitancy. As vaccinations had increasedand hospitalisations remained at low levels, population mobility had recovered considerably in manycountries, including in the North Atlantic, where stringent restrictions that had been in place earlierin the year had been relaxed.
This relaxation of containment measures had expanded opportunities for the consumption of discretionaryservices, including contact-intensive activities such as dining out and domestic air travel. There hadbeen a tentative restart to international tourism in some countries, particularly within Europe. Globalgoods trade and surveyed conditions in the global manufacturing sector had remained strong because ofongoing strength in the consumption of goods in advanced economies. The high level of new export orders, along with backlogs of existing orders that were still to be filled, indicated that the pipeline of workwould continue to support global production and goods trade in the months ahead. Delivery times hadlengthened further and global shipping costs were very high.
Members noted that, despite these positive developments, the global economic recovery remained uneven.Ongoing outbreaks of the virus, including of more transmissible variants, had hampered the recovery inmany economies. A significant resurgence in cases in Asia over preceding months was contributing toongoing complications in global supply chains.
Consistent with the global supply chain pressures and higher commodity prices, upstream producer priceshad continued to increase in many countries. This was more apparent for goods than services, althoughproducer prices were generally increasing at a faster pace than downstream consumer prices. Headlineconsumer price inflation had increased in advanced economies, although price pressures were generallynarrowly concentrated and expected to be transitory; they were also less evident in most measures ofunderlying inflation. Medium-term inflation expectations had increased in many advanced economies, butonly to rates consistent with, or a little below, central banks' targets.
Labour markets had continued to recover in the major advanced economies and leading indicators of labourdemand, such as job ads and employment intentions, remained strong. However, employment and hours workedgenerally remained below pre-pandemic levels, in contrast to the position in Australia. Labour forceparticipation rates were also still lower than before the pandemic in most advanced economies. Healthconcerns, ongoing school closures and considerable household income support had contributed to this. Incountries where the recovery in labour supply had lagged behind labour demand, pockets of wage pressureshad emerged. The prospect of a quick return to tight labour market conditions was most salient for theUnited States, where substantial fiscal stimulus continued to support demand.
Australia's terms of trade were expected to have reached near record levels in the June quarter, ledby high iron ore prices and a sharp rebound in the price of coal. Strong underlying demand from China andsteel producers in other countries had continued to underpin high iron ore prices, although prices hadbeen volatile of late in response to intermittent supply concerns and efforts of Chinese authorities tocontain prices by dampening speculation. The decline in Chinese imports of Australian coal had beenlargely offset by a pick-up in demand from elsewhere, and thermal coal prices had surged in recent weeksto their highest level in 10 years, as a warmer-than-expected summer had increased energy demand inparts of Asia.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic developments, members noted that the Australian economy wastransitioning from recovery to expansion. GDP had increased by a stronger-than-expected1.8 per cent in the March quarter to be almost 1 per cent above its pre-pandemiclevel. The solid momentum in growth had continued into the early part of the June quarter. RecentCOVID-19 outbreaks in many parts of the country, and associatedrestrictions, were considered likely to weigh on household consumption through the middle of theyear. However, as observed following earlier lockdowns, spending was expected to rebound whencontainment measures were eased, supported by highly accommodative policy settings, the strengthenedbalance sheets of many households and firms, and an increase in the pace of vaccinations.
Household consumption had increased by a little over 1 per cent in the March quarter, supported by growth in labour and financial income, and the household saving ratio remained around12 per cent. Consumption growth in the June quarter as a whole was expected to havemoderated, as restrictions on activity in Melbourne and the Greater Sydney region restrainedspending. Looking forward, households had scope to increase spending further as restrictions wereeased.
Members noted that private investment had been stronger than expected in the March quarter, and thatthe outlook was positive. Business investment had responded to policy measures, including thetemporary full expensing of asset purchases. The outlook for investment was supported by the recoveryin demand and high capacity utilisation, the increase in corporate profits over the preceding yearand accommodative financing conditions. Surveyed measures of business conditions were also verystrong. The near-term outlook for dwelling investment was underpinned by low interest rates and thelarge pipeline of construction work facilitated by the HomeBuilder program and state-based fiscalprograms.
Members discussed the continuing strength in established housing markets. Nationally, housing priceshad increased by more than 10 per cent in the first half of the year; a similar pace ofgrowth had been recorded in other advanced economies. Conditions were strong in both capital citiesand regional areas, and across different price segments. Over the first half of the year, there hadbeen increases in prices of units alongside further rises in prices of houses. Demand over thepreceding year had been led by owner-occupiers, although investors had become more active in recentmonths. As had been the case for some time, the flow of new listings for sale remained similar topre-pandemic levels but total listings were much lower, implying that dwellings were being sold at arapid pace. Rental markets had also tightened noticeably in most parts of the country compared with ayear earlier; rents for units in Melbourne had been the main exception, though even there the pace ofdecline in rents had eased over prior months. 
Turning to the labour market, members noted that the unemployment rate had declined further andfaster than expected earlier in the year, to pre-pandemic levels. Job vacancies had increasedsignificantly and had reached multi-decade highs as a share of the labour force. Some industrieswhere temporary visa holders had accounted for a sizeable share of employment in prior years, such ashospitality, had high levels of vacancies while employment remained below pre-pandemic levels. Thissuggested that the closure of Australia's international borders was contributing to thedifficulties faced by some firms in attracting workers at prevailing wages. However, new advertisedpositions were still being filled at a pace consistent with pre-pandemic patterns.
Members held a detailed discussion of the drivers of wages growth over the preceding decade and thefactors likely to affect wage outcomes in the period ahead. With indicators of future labour demandremaining strong and the participation rate around record high levels, it was likely that sparecapacity in the labour market would continue to decline in subsequent quarters. Consistent with this, members noted that there were some signs of wages growth picking up from the historically low levelsrecorded following the onset of the pandemic. In many cases, this reflected a recovery to the 2–2½ per cent average annual growth rate seen before the pandemic, rather than a shift to a materially faster pace. Information from the Bank's liaison programsuggested that firms were not expecting to make up for the period of wage freezes earlier in thepandemic. Further, the outlook for public sector wages, and rates of wages growth featuring in newenterprise bargaining agreements, suggested aggregate wage outcomes were unlikely to increasematerially beyond pre-pandemic rates in coming quarters. Nevertheless, there were ongoing reports offirms using bonuses and other non-wage incentives to attract and retain labour, within a generalenvironment of subdued wages growth.
Members discussed the evidence that wages growth was stronger in local labour markets with anunemployment rate below 5 per cent. They also discussed the timing of the reopening ofAustralia's international borders and its implications for labour supply. The decline in thenumber of temporary visa holders in Australia over the preceding year was consistent with reports oftightening labour market conditions in some sectors and regions.
In considering developments in labour supply, members also noted that labour force participation hadincreased over recent years and that a further increase was likely. This would contribute toavailable labour supply and supplement the additional hours sought by underemployed workers. Memberstherefore agreed that, ultimately, a tighter labour market would be required to overcome the inertiain wage- and price-setting norms and the focus on cost control established over much of the priordecade in Australia. Although there were plausible alternative paths for the economy in the periodahead, the central scenario remained one where wages growth and underlying inflation were expected toincrease only gradually over the subsequent 2 years. 
Members concluded their discussion of the domestic economy by focusing on longer-term developmentsrelating to productivity covered in the recently published 2021 Intergenerational Report.Compared with the 1990s, productivity growth in Australia and other advanced economies had slowed, reflecting a complex interplay of demographic trends, technological change, regulatory developments andother structural shifts. Business dynamism, including the pace of new innovations and their adoptionthroughout the economy, would be central to lifting Australian living standards over time.
International financial markets
Members commenced their discussion of developments in international financial markets by noting thatmarkets had interpreted the communications from the US Federal Reserve in June as being less dovish thanexpected. In particular, participants in the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting had revisedupwards their projections for economic growth and inflation in the near term, and in some cases hadbrought forward their expected timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate. This led toincreases in US policy-rate expectations and shorter-term government bond yields. Longer-term USgovernment bond yields had been volatile in response to the FOMC meeting and had declined over thepreceding month, reflecting a decline in longer-term inflation expectations.
Similar moves in sovereign yields had occurred across a number of advanced economies, including Australia.Even so, across advanced economies, central banks had continued to emphasise that near-term inflationpressures were likely to be temporary and that they remained committed to providing significant monetarypolicy support until there was evidence of sustained progress towards their inflation and employmentgoals. Most central banks had maintained the pace of their government bond purchases over the precedingmonth, although some had indicated that a slowing in the pace of purchases was likely in the periodahead. Members observed that central bank holdings of government bonds, including in Australia, wereexpected to continue to increase as a share of the total stock outstanding for some time. Equity marketshad remained around their recent record highs in most major markets, and conditions in corporate bondmarkets remained highly accommodative. Overall, financial conditions remained very accommodative.
There had been a broad-based appreciation of the US dollar following the FOMC meeting, to be slightlyabove its level at the start of the year against other major currencies. The Australian dollarcorrespondingly had depreciated to its lowest level against the US dollar in the current year; intrade-weighted terms, the Australian dollar had also declined to be a little below its level at the startof the year. Members noted that the depreciation had occurred despite commodity prices rising over thecourse of the year. In part, this had suggested that recent increases in commodity prices were notexpected to persist.
Financial conditions in emerging market economies had been relatively stable in preceding months, despitethe prospect of rising policy rates in advanced economies and central banks in some emerging marketeconomies having increased policy rates in response to rising inflationary pressures domestically.Financial conditions remained accommodative in China, although credit growth had slowed, consistent withthe authorities' goal of managing financial stability risks.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, the Bank's policy measures had continued to underpin very low interest rates and supportthe availability of credit. There had been little reaction in financial markets to the recent COVID-19 outbreaks and new restrictions imposed in many parts of the countryin late June.
Yields on Australian Government Securities (AGS) with a maturity of 3 to 5 years had risen inJune, following the FOMC meeting, the strong domestic labour force release for May and a bring-forward ofexpectations on the part of some market economists of the first increase in the cash rate. The yield onthe April 2024 Australian government bond dipped below 10 basis points for a time in early June, buthad risen to be close to 10 basis points subsequently. Prior to the Board meeting, the yield on theNovember 2024 bond had risen sharply, implying that market participants did not expect the Board toextend the yield target to this next 3-year bond.
Yields on longer-term AGS had declined in June alongside similar moves in US Treasury yields, reflectinglower longer-term inflation expectations in both countries. Members noted that yields for longer-term AGShad been moving broadly in line with US Treasury yields for much of the year. Members also noted thatspreads of yields on bonds issued by the states and territories (semis) to AGS had widened a littlefollowing the announcement of a larger-than-expected debt funding task for New South Wales, and thatyields on semis had been highly correlated across the states and territories. The Bank's bondpurchase program had continued to run smoothly and bond markets had continued to function well.
Bank funding costs and lending rates had drifted down to historic lows. At the closure of the draw-downwindow for the Term Funding Facility (TFF) at the end of June, banks had accessed $188 billion, oralmost 90 per cent of the total allowances, with the major banks and mid-sized Australian bankshaving drawn down all of their allowances. TFF funding had accounted for around 4 per cent ofall bank funding. Members noted that banks had also issued some bonds of late, but issuance remainedbelow average.
Demand for housing finance had strengthened further in May, with stronger growth in credit to bothowner-occupiers and investors. While bank lending to businesses had been little changed over precedingmonths, growth in broader measures of business debt had picked up to around the average of prior years.This pick-up had reflected lending to large businesses, including by entities that do not report to theAustralian Prudential Regulation Authority as well as through corporate bond issuance. Lending to smallbusinesses had also been little changed, although refinancing activity remained higher than usual assmall businesses took advantage of the lower interest rates on offer.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the economic recovery in Australia had beenstronger than earlier expected and that this was forecast to continue. Domestic financial conditionsremained very supportive and the exchange rate had depreciated a little. Household and business balancesheets were generally in good shape. The effect of the recent virus outbreaks and the lockdowns hadcreated additional uncertainty, but the experience to date had been that the economy bounced back quicklyonce outbreaks were contained and restrictions eased.
The recovery in the labour market had continued to be faster than expected and more Australians had jobsthan before the pandemic. The unemployment rate had declined further. Job vacancies were high and morefirms had been reporting shortages of labour.
Members observed that outcomes for the nominal side of the economy had not been as positive. Despite thestrong recovery in jobs and reports of labour shortages, inflation and wage outcomes remained subdued.While a pick-up in inflation and wages growth was expected, it was likely to be only gradual and modest.Year-ended CPI inflation was expected to rise to be temporarily above the target in the June quarterowing to the reversal of some COVID-19-related price reductions in theprevious year, but would subsequently decline.
In view of the environment of rising housing prices and low interest rates, members continued to emphasisethe importance of monitoring trends in housing borrowing and ensuring that lending standards aremaintained.
Members discussed the 3-year yield target for government bonds. They noted that, when the 3-year targetwas introduced in March 2020, the Board had judged that the probability of the cash rate increasing overthe subsequent 3 years was extremely low. Since that time, the maturity date for the 3-year bond hadbeen extended from April 2023 to April 2024 and would soon move to November 2024. The Bank's centralscenario implied that the conditions for an increase in the cash rate would not be met until 2024. Evenso, the faster-than-expected recovery in economic conditions over the course of 2021 had widened therange of alternative plausible scenarios for the economic outlook and therefore the cash rate over theperiod to November 2024. In view of these considerations, the Board decided to retain the April 2024 bondas the target bond, rather than extend the horizon to the bond with a maturity date of November 2024.
Members also discussed the future of the existing bond purchase program after the second $100 billiontranche of purchases is completed in early September. They noted the previously agreed framework formaking decisions about bond purchases. This framework took into account the effectiveness of the bondpurchases to date, the decisions of other central banks and, most importantly, progress towards theBoard's goals for inflation and employment. Members agreed that the bond purchase program had loweredrisk-free rates across the yield curve in Australia, and in doing so had reduced borrowing costs forhouseholds and businesses, supported asset values and contributed to a lower exchange rate than wouldotherwise have been the case. Through these channels, the bond purchase program had been one of thefactors underpinning the accommodative conditions necessary for economic recovery from the pandemic.Given the high degree of uncertainty about the economic outlook, members agreed that there should beflexibility to increase or reduce weekly bond purchases in the future, as warranted by the state of theeconomy at the time, rather than a commitment to a specific rate of purchases over an extended period.
Members then discussed the appropriate pace of future bond purchases. In particular, members consideredwhether to continue with the current pace of $5 billion per week or reduce purchases to$4 billion per week. Both amounts were within the range of market expectations. Members noted theevidence that central bank bond purchases had their effect through the total stock of bonds purchased, not the flow of those purchases.
Members acknowledged that an argument could be made to retain the pace of bond purchases at$5 billion per week, given that economic outcomes were still well short of the Bank's goals forinflation and employment. However, the economic outcomes had been materially better than earlier expectedand the outlook had improved. In light of these improvements and the agreed decision-making framework, members decided to adjust the weekly purchases from $5 billion to $4 billion and agreed toreview the rate of purchases at the November 2021 meeting.
The Board remained committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions for a return to fullemployment in Australia and inflation consistent with the 2 to 3 per cent target. It willnot increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the target range. The Bank'scentral scenario for the economy is that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting it willrequire the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than itwas at the time of the meeting.
The decision
The Board decided upon the following policy settings:
retain the April 2024 bond as the bond for the yield target and retain the target of 10 basispointscontinue purchasing government bonds after the completion of the current bond purchase program inearly September 2021 – these purchases will be at the rate of $4 billion per week until at leastmid November 2021maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlementbalances of zero per cent.