Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 6 October 2020
Members Participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Participating
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Jonathan Kearns (Head, FinancialStability Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion of the international economy by reviewing economic and healthoutcomes across a range of countries. Countries that had struggled to contain the coronavirus, and/orhad imposed severe nationwide lockdowns, had experienced larger contractions in output in the first halfof the year. Members noted that Australia's economic and health outcomes this year had comparedfavourably with the international experience.
In their discussion of developments over recent weeks, members noted that a number of countries, including in Western Europe, were experiencing a second wave of COVID-19cases. Most countries had imposed targeted restrictions in response, rather than nationwide lockdowns ashad been the case earlier in the year. More broadly, timely readings on global activity and labourmarkets, including job advertisements, were pointing to a gradual recovery in the global economy, butwith significant spare capacity remaining. This was likely to keep underlying global inflation pressureslow.
In turning to the recovery in China and other east Asian economies, members noted that exports andindustrial production had both recovered, but at different speeds. The extent of supply disruptions, differences in industry composition and changes in demand had all contributed to this pattern. Membersnoted that demand for China's exports had picked up. Elsewhere in east Asia, changing tradepatterns highlighted the varied nature of the economic shock induced by the pandemic. Economies mostinvolved in the production of semiconductors and other technology items for export, such as SouthKorea, had recorded a strong recovery in industrial production. By contrast, in those economies moregeared to the global automotive market, such as Japan and Thailand, industrial production hadexperienced a more subdued recovery.
Domestic Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion of domestic economic developments by reviewing the very largecontraction in activity in the June quarter. Excluding public demand, expenditure had declined verysharply. Consumption fell by 12 per cent, driven by a halving in spending on discretionaryservices. Dwelling investment fell by 7 per cent and business investment declined by4 per cent. These contractions in investment had been less than expected. Activity in theconstruction industry had not been disrupted to the extent initially anticipated, while the accelerateddepreciation allowance had encouraged more business spending on vehicles and other equipment thaninitially expected.
In comparing consumption in the June quarter in Australia with that in other advanced economies, members noted that domestic consumption of durable goods had been positive and stronger than elsewhere, while domestic consumption of non-durable goods and services had experienced large declines more inline with the experience abroad. Members also noted that indicators of consumption in the Septemberquarter had been stronger than expected.
Members discussed the significant increase in household savings in the June quarter and theimplications of this for the outlook. The sharp increase in savings reflected the record decline inhousehold consumption, mainly driven by constraints on certain types of consumption owing to therestrictions on activity, as many services could not be offered for sale. At the same time, householdincome had increased, supported by a number of policy measures, including the JobKeeper program and theCoronavirus Supplement paid to JobSeeker recipients. There had been some substitution toward theconsumption of goods and services not affected by restrictions (such as home office equipment andhousehold goods), but the overall effect of the restrictions on activity, combined with large incometransfers from the government, had been to reduce consumption relative to household income. A higherlevel of precautionary savings also accounted for part of the increase in household savings. Inaddition, household cash flow had been boosted by the significant volume of superannuationwithdrawals.
In discussing the implications of the increase in savings for the outlook, members noted that savingsbehaviour in the period ahead could differ markedly across households. Some people were likely toincrease their consumption (relative to income) as remaining restrictions on activity were lifted, whilehouseholds concerned about potential job losses would be inclined to maintain higher-than-usual levelsof savings as insurance against lower income in the future.
Members discussed a range of other policy changes that had supported economic activity in recentmonths. Activity in the detached housing market had picked up, particularly in Western Australia, as aresult of the Australian Government's HomeBuilder package and state government incentives. Theinstant asset write-off scheme had also contributed to the stronger-than-expected outcome fornon-mining business investment in the June quarter.
In turning to the labour market, members noted the substantial effect of the Stage4 restrictions in Victoria, while conditions in the labour market in other parts of the countryhad continued to improve. Jobs, employment and hours worked had recently declined in Victoria to aroundlevels previously recorded in May. For the country as a whole, however, members noted that thedeterioration in the labour market through the pandemic had been somewhat less severe than had beenexpected. The unemployment rate was now expected to peak below the 10 per cent levelprojected under the baseline forecast scenario in the August Statement on Monetary Policy.Nevertheless, substantial spare capacity remained in the labour market and its recovery over the mediumterm was expected to be gradual.
Members concluded their discussion of economic developments with a review of how businesses hadresponded to the pandemic. A recent survey indicated that some of the changes made by firms were likelyto be retained as a permanent feature of their business models, including, for example, the way thatproducts and services are offered, such as the increased use of online distribution channels.Information from business liaison contacts also suggested that, relative to the global financialcrisis, many firms had responded faster in reducing investment and employment, although this may havebeen because the shock to activity was significantly larger. Members noted that cost control and majorlevels of government assistance had supported the health of the business sector in aggregate, althoughthe future viability of some firms remained uncertain.
Financial Stability
Members were briefed on the evolution of financial stability risks in the Bank's regularhalf-yearly assessment. An unprecedented policy response had quickly restored financial marketfunctioning in the period soon after the onset of the pandemic. But with the economic recovery expectedto take some time, financial stability risks were now more related to declining credit quality.
Financial asset prices had rebounded from their lows in March, in part because of expectations of anextended period of low risk-free interest rates. However, there had also been a sharp fall in thecompensation investors receive for risk. This was despite uncertainty stemming from the shape of therecovery and a rise in political tensions internationally, as well as expectations of risinginsolvencies and defaults. For some heavily affected sectors, lost output would not be recovered quicklyand some businesses could face difficulty servicing their debts. These factors raised the risk of asharp fall in asset prices. Globally, there had been a decline in credit quality prior to the pandemic, which increased risks for investors, particularly those with leverage. Of note, there had been anincrease in the share of investment-grade bonds with a lower credit rating, and a substantial increasein the share of leveraged loans with few covenants.
Banks in the advanced economies had started the year with high levels of capital and liquidity as aresult of reforms that had followed the global financial crisis of over a decade earlier. Their balancesheet strength had enabled banks to act as a shock-absorber for the real economy, rather than magnifyingthe shock as they had during the global financial crisis. Policy actions, including decisions that loanswith repayment deferrals be treated as performing and restrictions on shareholder pay-outs, hadcontributed to banks' capital ratios remaining high. However, in some jurisdictions, banks hadentered the period with structurally low profitability; this would make it more difficult if they neededto raise equity in stressed times and would be likely to make those banks more cautious in expandingtheir lending. These risks were particularly high for those European countries where low bankprofitability occurred in tandem with high levels of government debt, since a fall in sovereign debtvalues would erode bank capital and lead investors to question the government's ability to supporttroubled banks.
Members noted that many businesses in Australia had increased their cash buffers in 2020. Prior to thepandemic, firm-level data suggested that around half of businesses had enough cash to pay their expensesfor less than one month. However, by mid 2020, support measures provided by the government, landlords and lenders had boosted businesses' cash buffers, with estimates suggesting that asignificant share of businesses could cover at least six months of expenses. Listed companies had largerbuffers than private companies and unincorporated businesses. Members also noted that, for somebusinesses, their best survival strategy would be to hibernate until economic conditions hadsufficiently normalised. Business failures had been substantially lower in 2020 than in preceding yearsbecause of insolvency moratoriums and the various support measures. However, business failures wereexpected to rise, particularly for small businesses.
Risks for some types of commercial property were high as declining demand had increased the chance offalling property values. Retail property vacancy rates had been rising prior to 2020 because ofstructural changes in the retail sector. Efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus hadaccelerated this trend in the first half of 2020. Office vacancy rates had also increased given thedecline in economic activity, although this had been from low levels of vacancies, particularly inSydney and Melbourne. Nevertheless, an increase in office supply coupled with uncertainty about futureworking conditions (and therefore office demand) increased the risk of falls in office property prices, particularly for secondary-grade buildings. Members noted that demand for industrial property had beenstrong prior to the pandemic, driven by increasing e-commerce, and that, if anything, this had sincebeen reinforced. Banks' direct commercial property exposures had declined since the globalfinancial crisis, although members noted there was uncertainty about the size of banks' indirectexposures through lending to non-banks that subsequently lent to property investors, as well as the useof commercial property as collateral for business lending.
Many households had increased their liquidity buffers in 2020. This reflected a reduction in livingexpenses and, more so for some renting households, an increase in income from government payments. Inthe early 1990s' recession the unemployment rate had increased by less for households withmortgages than for households that rent, but in 2020 the unemployment rate had increased by a similaramount for both types of households. The unemployment rate for households with mortgages, nevertheless, remained lower than for renters. Members noted that repayments had been deferred on around7 per cent of housing loans, a slight decline from the peak earlier in the year. Loans with arepayment deferral were more likely to have a higher loan-to-valuation ratio and to have been extendedto those employed in industries relatively more adversely affected by the pandemic. Demand for housinghad moderated slightly, with only relatively small falls in housing prices in Sydney and Melbourne.Housing prices had increased in all other cities in September. Most borrowers for housing had largeamounts of equity in their properties, with only 3 per cent of borrowers estimated to havenegative equity.
Banks in Australia had increased their provisions in the first half of 2020 to account for expectedfuture losses resulting from the pandemic. Banks' non-performing loan ratio was low, but had beenincreasing gradually since the start of the year. This had reflected a decline in credit quality forhousing loans to both owner-occupiers and investors. The increase in the non-performing loan ratio forpersonal lending was partly due to a reduction in outstanding personal credit, particularly credit cardbalances, as those borrowers in a stronger financial position had been repaying their debts. Both largeand small banks had high levels of capital. Stress tests of the banks indicated they had sufficientcapital to withstand an economic contraction that was far more severe than expected. Members noted that, given their strong balance sheets, banks were well placed to continue lending and thereby support theeconomic recovery.
International Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion of international financial markets by noting that financialconditions had continued to support the global economy over the preceding month. Central banks in theadvanced economies had left their policy rates unchanged, but financial market prices implied that somecentral banks were expected to ease policy further. In the case of some central banks, such as theEuropean Central Bank, this was in response to weaker-than-expected economic conditions and risingdownside risks to the economic outlook. In the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Bank ofEngland, the expectation of further easing had followed guidance from these central banks that they werepreparing for the possibility of negative policy rates.
Central banks in the advanced economies had also continued to purchase substantial amounts ofgovernment debt in the secondary markets. At its September meeting, the US Federal Reserve had left thepace of asset purchases unchanged, but acknowledged that asset purchases were being undertaken to fosteraccommodative financial conditions, in addition to sustaining market functioning.
Low policy rates and large asset purchase programs had contributed to sovereign bond yields in majoradvanced economies remaining low and stable. Members noted that longer-term yields for AustralianGovernment Securities (AGS) had been higher than in almost all other advanced economies, although therehad been some narrowing of the interest rate differential between Australia and other major advancedeconomies in recent weeks. The recent narrowing in yield differentials had contributed to a broad-baseddepreciation of the Australian dollar over the previous month, as had an increase in risk aversion and adecline in some commodity prices, which had been related to rising concerns about the prospects forglobal output growth. Nevertheless, the Australian dollar had remained just below its peak of theprevious few years. While members noted that the Australian dollar exchange rate was broadly consistentwith its fundamental determinants, a lower exchange rate would provide more stimulus to the Australianeconomy in the recovery phase.
In emerging markets, financial conditions had also been supported by accommodative policy settings.Financial conditions in China had remained broadly accommodative, although they had tightened in recentmonths together with the economic recovery there. Growth in total social financing had remained strongerthan the previous year, consistent with the stated goal of the authorities. The Chinese renminbi hadappreciated over the preceding couple of months. However, other emerging market economies had remainedvulnerable to a further deterioration in their economic outlook because of the ongoing increase in COVID-19 cases, pre-existing macroeconomic fragilities and a reliance on externalfinancing, which limited the scope for additional fiscal stimulus.
Domestic Financial Markets
Domestically, the Bank's policy measures had continued to underpin accommodative financialconditions. Financial market prices implied that investors now expected the cash rate to decline tobelow 10 basis points, compared with earlier expectations that the cash rate would remain ataround its current level of 13 basis points for some time. Money market rates and bond yields hadalso declined in line with this change in market expectations.
The Bank had purchased bonds in the secondary market in early September in support of the 3-year AGSyield target. Subsequently, the 3-year yield had moved well below 20 basis points as marketparticipants' expectations for further policy actions by the Bank had increased. Members notedthat investor demand for recent AGS issuance had been strong and that spreads of semi-government yieldsto AGS had remained narrow.
Members also noted that banks had drawn down nearly all of their initial allowances of$84 billion from the Term Funding Facility by the 30 September deadline. This was supportinghistorically low bank funding costs. From the start of October, banks were able to draw on the newsupplementary allowance of $57 billion in total, as well as additional allowances, which amountedto $59 billion at the time of the meeting.
Interest rates on housing and business loans remained historically low. Business credit had decreaseda little further in August as large businesses continued to repay revolving credit facilities, whichthey had drawn down in March and April for precautionary purposes. Members noted that, notwithstandingthis, large businesses had issued more corporate bonds over the year to date than the average of recentyears, as had been the case in other economies. Large businesses had also increased their credit limitsat banks. Meanwhile, lending to small and medium-sized businesses had remained little changed. Weaknessin business credit growth appeared to be driven mostly by lower demand in response to weak economicconditions and the uncertain environment, although the availability of credit to businesses had alsotightened a little following the onset of the pandemic.
Growth in credit for owner-occupied housing had remained steady in recent months. Commitments forhousing loans to owner-occupiers had picked up further in August across all states, consistent with ageneral increase in activity in the housing market. By contrast, credit to investors in housing hadremained weak, although it had stopped declining in August. Following an earlier tightening in responseto the pandemic, more recently constraints on the supply of housing finance had eased slightly.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economy was gradually recovering, but that most economies were still some way from the output levels that prevailed before the pandemic.The continuation of the recovery was dependent on containment of the virus. The recovery was mostadvanced in China, where conditions had improved substantially over preceding months. Globally, inflation remained very low and below central bank targets.
The Australian economy had experienced the largest peacetime economic contraction since the 1930s.Nevertheless, members noted that the decline in output in the June quarter had been smaller than in mostother countries and smaller than had been expected. A recovery was under way in most of Australia, although the second COVID-19 outbreak in Victoria and associatedrestrictions on activity had been having a major effect on the economy in that state. Labour marketconditions had improved somewhat over the preceding few months, with the unemployment rate likely topeak at a lower rate than earlier expected. Nevertheless, both unemployment and underemployment wereexpected to remain high for an extended period. The recovery was likely to be slow and uneven, andinflation was expected to remain subdued for some time.
Members agreed that the Board's policy package was continuing to support the Australian economy byunderpinning very low borrowing costs and the supply of credit to households and businesses. There was avery high level of liquidity in the Australian financial system and the policy package had helped tolower funding costs. Authorised deposit-taking institutions had drawn down $83 billion of low-costfunding through the Term Funding Facility and had access to a further $114 billion under thefacility. Members noted that the Australian banking system, with its strong capital and liquiditybuffers, had remained resilient and was helping the economy traverse the current difficult period.
Over the prior month, the Bank had purchased AGS in support of the Board's 3-year yield target ofaround 25 basis points. Government bond markets had been operating effectively, also during aperiod of significant increase in issuance. The Bank stood ready to purchase AGS and semi-governmentsecurities in the event of a recurrence of market dysfunction.
Members recognised that the substantial, coordinated and unprecedented easing of fiscal and monetarypolicy in Australia was helping to sustain the economy through the current period. Members noted thatpublic sector balance sheets in Australia were strong, which allowed for the provision of continuedsupport, with the Australian Government Budget for 2020/21 to beannounced that evening. The Secretary to the Australian Treasury briefed members on the main features ofthe Budget. Members considered that fiscal and monetary support would be required for some time giventhe outlook for the economy and the prospect of high unemployment.
The Board discussed the case for additional monetary easing to support jobs and the overall economy. Asin previous meetings, members discussed the options of reducing the targets for the cash rate and the3-year yield towards zero, without going negative, and buying government bonds further along the yieldcurve. These options would have the effect of further easing financial conditions in Australia.
In considering the case for further monetary measures, members discussed monetary policy developmentsabroad and their implications for financial conditions in Australia, through the yield curve and theexchange rate. Members noted that the larger balance sheet expansions by other central banks relative tothe Reserve Bank was contributing to lower sovereign yields in most other advanced economies than inAustralia. Members discussed the implications of this for the Australian dollar exchange rate.
Members also discussed how much traction further monetary easing might obtain in terms of bettereconomic outcomes. They recognised that some parts of the transmission of easier monetary policy hadbeen impaired as a result of the restrictions on activity in parts of the economy. However, as theeconomy opens up, members considered it reasonable to expect that further monetary easing would gainmore traction than had been the case earlier. Members also considered the effect of lower interest rateson community confidence and on those people who rely on interest income.
Members discussed the possible effect of further monetary easing on financial stability. A furthereasing would help to reduce financial stability risks by strengthening the economy and private sectorbalance sheets, thereby lowering the number of non-performing loans. This benefit would need to beweighed against any additional risks as investors search for yield in the low interest rate environment, including those resulting from higher leverage and higher asset prices, particularly in the housingmarket. On balance, the Board thought it likely that there were greater financial stability benefitsfrom a stronger economy, while acknowledging that risks in asset markets had to be closelymonitored.
The Board also considered the nature of the forward guidance regarding the cash rate. Over recentmonths, the Board had communicated that it would ‘not increase the cash rate target untilprogress is being made towards full employment and it is confident that inflation will be sustainablywithin the 2–3 per cent target band’. Given the higher level of uncertaintyabout inflation dynamics in the current economic environment, the Board agreed to place more weight onactual, not forecast, inflation in its decision-making. Members indicated that they would also like tosee more than just progress towards full employment before considering an increase in the cash rate, asthe Board views addressing the high rate of unemployment as an important national priority. Membersrecognised that while inflation can move up and down for a range of reasons, achieving inflationconsistent with the target is likely to require a return to a tight labour market.
Members agreed that this evolution in forward guidance would best be announced in a speech by theGovernor on 15 October. This would allow for greater context to be provided than was possible inthe post-meeting statement. The Board remains of the view that it would be appropriate to remove theyield target before the cash rate itself is raised.
The Board affirmed its commitment to supporting jobs, incomes and businesses in Australia. Its actions, including the decision in September to expand the Term Funding Facility, were keeping funding costs lowand assisting with the supply of credit. It agreed to maintain highly accommodative policy settings aslong as required and to continue to consider how additional monetary easing could support jobs as theeconomy opens up further.
The Decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.25 per centa target of 0.25 per cent for the yield on 3-year Australian Government bondsthe expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small andmedium-sized businessesan interest rate of 10 basis points on Exchange Settlement balances held by financialinstitutions at the Bank.