Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 6 September 2022
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Members had granted leave of absence to Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), in accordance with section 18Aof the Reserve Bank Act 1959.
Others present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Andrea Brischetto (Head, Financial Stability Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Jacobs (Deputy Secretary)
Marion Kohler (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Penelope Smith (Head, InternationalDepartment), Carl Schwartz (Acting Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion by noting that global inflation was high and well above centralbanks’ targets in many economies. High inflation was impinging on households’ real incomes andsentiment, and the rapid increase in interest rates would further weigh on aggregate household disposableincome. Fuel prices had declined recently and the latest data showed headline inflation had stoppedrising in most economies, with the exception of Europe. However, underlying inflation remained high, soit was too early to conclude that this represented a change in trend. Upstream price pressures hadcontinued to moderate, and supplier delivery times had edged closer to levels last seen prior to thepandemic. Shipping rates had also fallen over recent months. On the other hand, services inflation wasstill rising and wages growth in some economies was faster than would be compatible with inflationreturning to targets.
Members observed that analysts had again downgraded the outlook for global growth, reflecting thedeteriorating outlook in Europe and for interest-rate sensitive sectors in a number of economies. Whilesome forward-looking business surveys had turned down in the past month or so, recent data in manyeconomies pointed to ongoing expansion. Domestic final demand in advanced economies had remained firm inthe June quarter, supported by an increase in consumption of services. Strong growth in nominal labourincomes and, in some advanced economies, further declines in saving rates were cushioning the effect ofhigher inflation on households’ spending. Labour markets remained strong, with job vacanciesexceeding the number of unemployed in many cases. While business hiring intentions were slightly belowtheir peaks, they remained at a very high level.
Energy availability had become a critical issue in Europe. Members noted that reduced gas supplies fromRussia had coincided with a severe drought and other disruptions to production that had reduced theavailability of hydro and nuclear power. European gas prices had surpassed their March peaks as Russiansupplies to Europe had fallen 80 per cent below 2021 levels. The price of wholesale electricitywas at record highs across the continent and was expected to remain at very high levels for theforeseeable future. Household and business energy costs were expected to surge later in the year asrecent increases in wholesale gas prices are passed on to retail bills. Gas consumption had fallensignificantly and authorities had committed to restrict consumption to 15 per cent below normallevels through winter.
The Chinese economy was recovering from recent lockdowns, but was facing significant headwinds, especiallyin the real estate sector. Policy remained accommodative and fiscal support had increased recently, withinfrastructure investment expected to be a key driver of growth this year. Industrial production hadincreased moderately in July, although there had been some disruptions in a couple of provinces stemmingfrom drought and associated electricity shortages. Members observed that the Chinese real estate sectorremained very weak, despite some recent policy support. New housing sales had declined in July to be backaround their lows during recent lockdowns. Liaison contacts had reported that market confidence had beenaffected by concerns about the solvency of developers. The weak outcomes for residential constructionwere exacerbating the outlook for steel production, which had already been constrained by governmentproduction caps. Iron ore prices had declined towards the bottom of their range over the past two years.
Members noted that high coal and gas prices were supporting Australia’s terms of trade at recordlevels. In contrast to other energy commodities, crude oil prices were well below their peaks followingRussia’s invasion of Ukraine. This decline reflected concerns about the global outlook and improvedsupply. Even so, the price of crude oil remained about 20 per cent above the level at thebeginning of 2022. Limited spare capacity and gas-to-oil substitution in Europe and elsewhere were likelyto support crude oil prices in the period ahead. Base metals and food commodity prices had been fairlysteady over the preceding month, but had declined from the peaks reached after Russia’s invasion ofUkraine.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members observed that timely indicators pointed to inflation remaininghigh and broadly based in the September quarter. Some retailers expected to apply further large increasesin their prices in coming quarters, in part reflecting the pass-through of earlier rises in input costs.By contrast, petrol prices had declined in August and were expected to subtract from headline inflationin the September quarter. The expiration of the fuel excise cut would boost headline inflation in theDecember quarter. Consistent with the decline in petrol prices, short-term measures of inflationexpectations had declined modestly. Longer term inflation expectations generally remained within theinflation target range. Members noted that, from October, the Australian Bureau of Statistics wouldcommence publishing a monthly CPI indicator, which would provide a timelier read on price pressures– though it could take some time for reliable trends to be discernible.
Household spending appeared to have held up in the September quarter to date. Strong labour marketconditions and income growth were providing an important counterbalance for household budgets that facedincreased pressure from rising prices and higher interest rates. Although payments data had softened alittle of late, retail sales had increased strongly in July and most retailers in the Bank’s liaisonprogram had indicated that consumption behaviour was changing only slowly in response to cost-of-livingpressures. Spending overseas by Australian residents had also grown strongly over prior months, which– although it would not add to domestic demand – was consistent with the ongoing rebalancingtowards pre-pandemic patterns of spending. Members noted that domestic activity would benefit fromincreased numbers of foreign tourists and students, which are recorded as services exports.
Declines in housing prices had broadened out to most capital cities and regional areas, alongside weakerhousing sales activity, rising interest rates and the expectation of further interest rate increases. Bycontrast, rental markets were tight. Vacancy rates in Sydney and Melbourne had declined from the highlevels seen since the start of the year and were likely to decline further as international studentnumbers increased. Vacancy rates in other capital cities remained around historical lows.
Members noted that the June quarter National Accounts would be released the day after the meeting. GDP wasexpected to have grown strongly in the quarter, with growth in domestic final demand led by householdconsumption. Residential construction work done was expected to have declined in the June quarter, reflecting wetter-than-average weather conditions along the east coast of Australia, as well as ongoingshortages of materials and labour. Exports had grown strongly in the quarter, underpinned by resourcesexports, following several soft outcomes.
The outlook for business investment remained positive. The June quarter ABS Capital Expenditure Survey, conducted in July and August, indicated that non-mining firms expected to increase investment in the2022/23 financial year, driven by investment in machinery andequipment. Capacity utilisation remained high across industries, with non-mining capacity utilisation atits highest level in over three decades.
The demand for labour remained robust, judging by the timely information from job ads and liaison. Mostfirms in the liaison program expected to increase headcount, but some had expressed concern about theirability to do so because of poor labour availability and strong competition from other firms. Measuredemployment had declined in July; however, looking through the monthly volatility, the labour marketremained very strong. The employment-to-population ratio and participation rate were around record highs, and measures of spare capacity were at their lowest levels in decades. The unemployment rate had declinedfurther to 3.4 per cent in July. Members noted recent announcements that staffing levels invisa processing would be increased to clear backlogs in this area. Immigration of skilled workers, students and working holidaymakers could all be anticipated to increase in the period ahead, which wouldadd to labour supply as well as aggregate demand.
Wages growth was picking up as expected. A range of timely measures, including from liaison, businesssurveys and measures based on retail banking data, indicated that this pick-up had continued over priormonths. In the June quarter, the Wage Price Index had increased by 0.7 per cent in the quarterand 2.6 per cent in year-ended terms. The pick-up in growth had been stronger in the privatesector than in the public sector, where wages growth had remained more subdued. Wages growth had beenstrongest in the construction industry, consistent with information from liaison about labour costs andavailability in that industry.
International financial markets
Members commenced their discussion of international financial markets by noting that central banks in mostadvanced economies had been increasing policy rates at a rapid pace to address high inflation andmitigate the risk that above-target inflation becomes embedded in wage- and price-setting behaviour.During the preceding month, the Bank of England, the Norges Bank and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand hadraised their policy rates by 50 basis points, and the Bank of Korea had increased its policy rate by25 basis points.
Central banks in most advanced economies had continued to signal that further policy rate increases arelikely. Communication from the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank emphasised that inflation islikely to be more persistent than earlier expected and that policy rates will need to remain higher forlonger in order to bring inflation back to target. At the same time, these central banks acknowledged theadverse effect such outcomes would have on economic activity.
Government bond yields had risen over the preceding month, reflecting upward revisions to the policy ratepaths implied by market pricing as well as increases in inflation expectations for the near term. Membersnoted that longer term inflation expectations had also increased, but remained within the 2 to3 per cent range in most advanced economies. Sovereign yield curves in a number of advancedeconomies – including Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States – were flat ordownward sloping, indicating market concerns about the possibility of recessions in these economies.Members observed that the Australian yield curve remained upward sloping.
Private sector financing conditions had become tighter than earlier in the year. Equity prices had fallennoticeably and corporate bond spreads were higher as market participants’ expectations for policyrates had trended higher. The US dollar had appreciated further, consistent with another increase inshort-term US Government bond yields relative to other economies.
The Australian dollar had depreciated against the US dollar over the year to date, but hadappreciated on a trade-weighted basis over the same period. The RBA Index of Commodity Prices was aroundits levels at the beginning of the year, despite the decline in the price of iron ore.
The People’s Bank of China had eased monetary policy further amid signs of increased weakness in theChinese economy, particularly in the property sector; authorities had also announced lending support tohelp complete unfinished apartment projects. The further easing of policy rates had been associated withdownward pressure on the renminbi, which had depreciated further from its recent lows against theUS dollar as the interest rate differential between US and Chinese government bonds had widened.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that, in the domestic market, yields had increased over the preceding month in line withglobal developments. Members observed that market pricing implied the cash rate was expected to beincreased by a further 50 basis points in September, and to be around 3¼ per cent by theend of the year. The end-year pricing was a little above the median forecast of market economists.Banks’ overall funding costs had increased significantly in recent months, as much of theirwholesale funding is ultimately linked to money market rates. Retail deposit rates had also increased, but by a smaller amount.
As was the case in previous months, housing lenders had passed on the full amount of the increase in thecash rate in August to their standard variable rates. Members noted that, as the previous increases inthe cash rate flowed through, mortgage interest payments were expected to increase to around4½ per cent of household disposable income over the coming months, and to almost5 per cent by the end of the year. These estimates assumed that maturing fixed rate loans wouldbe replaced with variable rate loans. Overall interest payments on housing loans were expected to respondmore gradually to changes in interest rates than in the past because of the higher fixed-rate share ofcredit (almost 35 per cent of housing credit at present, compared with 20 per centprior to the onset of the pandemic). Net payments into offset and redraw accounts had remained strong upto July, in line with flows in 2021, despite the rise in interest payments.
Members observed that credit growth had remained strong overall. Demand for business credit had beensupported in recent months by strong economic conditions and the lagged effects of a high level ofmergers and acquisitions activity. In addition, bank credit had been favourably priced relative to theissuance of corporate bonds, and businesses had drawn down existing credit facilities to manage liquiditychallenges arising from supply chain disruptions and cost increases. By contrast, housing credit growthhad moderated in recent months, and the decline in housing loan commitments from their high level at thestart of the year was expected to result in a further slowing in housing credit growth in the periodahead.
Review of the bond purchase program
Members reviewed the operation and effectiveness of the bond purchase program (BPP) introduced in November2020 as part of the second package of monetary policy measures implemented by the Bank in response to theeffects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The discussion was based on a staff reviewcommissioned by the Board.
Members observed that the BPP, together with the other monetary policy measures put in place during thepandemic, had contributed to the strong recovery of the Australian economy, with unemployment havingdeclined to its lowest rate in almost 50 years.
The BPP involved purchasing government bonds in order to lower yields at the 5–10 year part of the yield curve. The program was introduced tocomplement the price-based, three-year yield target introduced in March 2020 and the Term FundingFacility, along with the longstanding overnight cash rate target, which forms the anchor point for therisk-free interest rate term structure. Together, the policy measures had lowered the whole structure ofinterest rates in Australia and supported confidence in the economy. However, members noted that it isdifficult to identify the exact effect of the BPP on the economy, because it was implemented as part of abroader package of policy measures that reinforced one another. Moreover, a key benefit of the policypackage was to provide insurance against the significant downside risks the economy was facing during thepandemic – a benefit that is inherently very difficult to quantify, especially given that downsiderisks were avoided.
Members noted that the BPP had affected the public sector balance sheet in several ways. There is expectedto be a financial cost to the Bank because the purchased bonds pay a fixed return, while the interestpaid on the Exchange Settlement (ES) balances created to finance the bonds varies with monetary policysettings and so rises as monetary policy is tightened. The ultimate cost will be known only once the lastof the purchased bonds matures in 2033. Members noted that it is important to assess this potential costin the context of the wider benefits to the economy that have flowed from the BPP as part of the packageof monetary policy measures. There are also expected to be a number of benefits to the public sectorbalance sheet. The reduction in yields lowered the cost of government debt issuance, while strongereconomic activity than otherwise increased tax revenues and reduced government support payments. Thesebenefits to government finances are material, although they are difficult to quantify. Members observedthat the Bank would record an accounting loss in 2021/22 because theincrease in bond yields (consistent with the higher expected path of the ES rate) had caused the marketvalue of the purchased bonds to fall. At the same time, the overall Commonwealth financial position wouldincorporate some offsetting accounting gains, given issued bonds represent a liability on the generalgovernment balance sheet.
In light of the experience, members judged it appropriate to consider use of a BPP again only in extremecircumstances, when the usual monetary policy tool – the cash rate target – has been employedto the full extent possible. Compared with a yield target, a BPP provides more flexibility to respond toevolving economic circumstances, although it could entail larger financial costs. In considering anyfuture use of a BPP, members noted that it would need to be evaluated against other policy options at thetime, taking into account the costs of the BPP under a full range of scenarios.
Members agreed to the publication of the review of the BPP. A review of the Bank’s approach toforward guidance is under way and will be published later in the year.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members noted that inflation in Australia was at its highest level inseveral decades and was expected to increase further over the months ahead. Global factors continued toexplain much of the increase in inflation. However, domestic factors were also playing a role, withwidespread upward pressure on prices from strong demand, a tight labour market and capacity constraintsin some sectors of the economy.
Members noted that inflation was expected to peak later this year and then decline back towards the2 to 3 per cent target range. The expected moderation in inflation reflected the ongoingresolution of global supply-side problems, recent declines in some commodity prices and the impact ofrising interest rates. Medium-term inflation expectations remained well anchored, and it was seen asimportant that this remain the case. The Bank’s central forecast was for CPI inflation to be around7¾ per cent over 2022, a little above 4 per cent over 2023 and around3 per cent over 2024.
The Australian economy was continuing to grow solidly. Consumer spending had so far been resilient tohigher interest rates, and national income had been boosted by a record level of the terms of trade. Atthe same time, the increases in interest rates had seen an easing of conditions in the establishedhousing market alongside a softening in household demand for credit.
The labour market had remained tight and continued to indicate that the economy was having difficultymeeting the level of aggregate demand. Many firms were finding it challenging to hire workers. Theunemployment rate had declined further in July to 3.4 per cent, the lowest rate in almost50 years, and the continued high level of job vacancies suggested a further decline was in prospectover the months ahead. Members noted that many Australians are benefitting from the greater opportunitiesfor work provided by the tighter labour market, notably young people, women and longer term unemployedpeople. Beyond the near term, some increase in unemployment was expected as economic growth slows owingto the effects of higher interest rates, although members noted that changes in labour market conditionstended to lag some other indicators of economic activity.
Wages growth had picked up from the low rates of prior years and there were some pockets where labourcosts were increasing briskly. However, members noted that the rate of base wages growth so far had notreached levels that would be inconsistent with achieving the inflation target on a sustained basis.Nevertheless, given the tight labour market and the upstream price pressures, the Board would continue topay close attention to both the evolution of labour costs and the price-setting behaviour of firms in theperiod ahead.
Members noted that an important source of uncertainty continued to be the behaviour of household spending.Higher inflation and higher interest rates were putting pressure on household budgets. Consumerconfidence had also fallen and housing prices were declining in most cities and regions after the earlierlarge increases. Working in the other direction, people were finding jobs, gaining more hours of work andreceiving higher wages. Many households had built up large financial buffers and the saving rate remainedhigher than before the pandemic. While the high levels of payments into offset and redraw accountssuggested that some households remained in a favourable financial position, members acknowledged thatother households were finding conditions difficult in the face of higher interest rates and higherinflation. The Board would be paying close attention to how these various factors balanced out as itassessed the appropriate setting of monetary policy.
The outlook for global economic growth had deteriorated and posed a key uncertainty. Central banks inseveral large advanced economies had expressed further resolve in tightening monetary policy to preventhigh inflation from becoming entrenched, and this was likely to entail a period of significantly lowergrowth. High inflation was also placing pressure on real incomes, most significantly in Europe, relatedto the worsening effects on energy markets following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. In addition, COVID-19 containment measures and other policy challenges continued to weighon the outlook for growth in China. Some slowing in the global economy would be important to returninginflation to central banks’ targets, but the potential for a sharp slowing continued to present adownside risk to the outlook.
Members judged that a further increase in interest rates would help bring inflation back to target andcreate a more sustainable balance of demand and supply in the Australian economy. They discussed thearguments around raising interest rates by either 25 basis points or 50 basis points. Membersemphasised that price stability is a prerequisite for a strong economy and a sustained period of fullemployment. They acknowledged that monetary policy operates with a lag and that interest rates had beenincreased quite quickly and were getting closer to normal settings. Given the importance of returninginflation to target, the potential damage to the economy from persistent high inflation and the stillrelatively low level of the cash rate, the Board decided to increase the cash rate by a further50 basis points.
The Board expects to increase interest rates further over the months ahead, but it is not on a pre-setpath given the uncertainties surrounding the outlook for inflation and growth. The full effects of higherinterest rates were yet to be felt in mortgage payments, and the broader effects on activity andinflation would take some time to be apparent. The Board was resolute in the need to ensure inflationreturned to target, but mindful that the path to achieve this needed to account for the risks to growthand employment. The Board is seeking to return inflation to target while keeping the economy on an evenkeel. The path to achieving this balance remains a narrow one and clouded in uncertainty.
The size and timing of future interest rate increases will continue to be guided by the incoming data andthe Board’s assessment of the outlook for inflation and the labour market, including the risks tothe outlook. All else equal, members saw the case for a slower pace of increase in interest rates asbecoming stronger as the level of the cash rate rises. The Board is committed to doing what is necessaryto ensure that inflation in Australia returns to target over time.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 50 basis points to 2.35 per cent. Italso increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 50 basis points to2.25 per cent.