Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 7 April 2020
Members Participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Participating
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, EconomicAnalysis Department), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Financial Stability Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International Financial Markets
Members commenced their discussion with a review of the information available on the spread of thenovel coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The outbreak was first and foremost a public health issue, but wasalso having very large adverse effects on economies and financial systems around the world. Financialconditions had been highly volatile in March, reflecting the deterioration in the economic outlook, increased uncertainty and a substantial increase in demand for cash over other assets. Central banks hadresponded forcefully with a wide range of policy measures. In response to these measures and sizeableresponses from fiscal authorities, financial conditions had stabilised but remained fragile.
Central banks had taken actions to lower risk-free rates across the yield curve. Policy rates hadbeen reduced where there was scope to do so, and were at ¼ per cent or lower in all ofthe major advanced economies. Purchases of government bonds had been scaled up significantly. As aresult of these purchases, central bank balance sheets had expanded rapidly in March.
Central banks had also sought to accommodate increased demand for cash and support marketfunctioning. They had increased the provision of liquidity to the financial system by increasing thesize and extending the maturity of their regular open market operations. Many central banks had alsosought to improve market functioning – particularly of key bond markets that provide importantpricing benchmarks – by directly purchasing securities in secondary markets. The US FederalReserve had acted to help meet demand for US dollars from non-US entities, most notably byactivating and extending its network of bilateral swap lines with other central banks, including theReserve Bank of Australia.
There had been a range of actions to support the supply of credit, particularly to businesses.Central banks were introducing or expanding term funding schemes to provide low-cost funds to banks andencourage them to continue supplying credit to businesses and households. Prudential measures had madeit easier for banks to expand their balance sheets. These measures had complemented actions bygovernments to assist business borrowers directly.
Members noted that the actions taken by central banks in sovereign bond markets had helped to supportmarket liquidity and put downward pressure on yields. Liquidity conditions in the market for USTreasuries (as reflected in bid-ask spreads) had improved since mid March, but had not yet fullynormalised. Declines in longer-term yields had been limited as market participants were factoring inthe prospect of significantly higher volumes of bond issuance to fund large fiscal deficits over theperiod ahead. Nevertheless, sovereign bond yields across the advanced economies remained at low levels.Spreads between Italian and Spanish yields and those of German Bunds had widened in early March as theCOVID-19 outbreaks in those countries had intensified, and amid concerns about conditions in thebanking systems and the sustainability of their public finances. However, the new asset purchaseprogram established by the European Central Bank had helped to contain the widening of thesespreads.
Conditions in US dollar funding markets had tightened significantly, although stresses in thesemarkets had eased since mid March. Spreads in short-term unsecured US dollar funding markets hadrisen, reflecting increased demand for liquidity and limitations on the capacity of financialinstitutions to intermediate these markets. In response, the Federal Reserve had implemented severalpolicy measures to increase the supply of US dollars, which had helped to stabilise or narrowspreads in some markets. The bilateral swap lines between the Federal Reserve and other major centralbanks had been utilised extensively to provide US dollar liquidity to financial institutions, particularly in Europe and Japan. In contrast, there had not been much demand for US dollarfunding from Australian financial institutions.
Members noted that funding markets remained strained for corporations, particularly those whoserevenues were most exposed to the economic impact of the measures to contain COVID-19 or werehighly leveraged. Corporate bond spreads had risen, but overall borrowing costs were still modest byhistorical standards, reflecting the historically low levels of government bond yields. Marketconditions in primary corporate bond markets had been mixed. Corporations with high credit quality hadissued record volumes of debt in March to build cash reserves. In contrast, issuance of high-yield debthad largely ceased. Other risky asset classes, such as equities, remained volatile.
In emerging market economies, government bond yields had risen sharply, equity prices had fallen andexchange rates had depreciated. There had also been substantial capital outflows. The tightening infinancial conditions partly reflected concerns about the impact of COVID-19 on output growth inthese economies, particularly for commodity exporters and countries that had recently received financein large part via foreign capital and/or in foreign currency. A number of emerging market andlow-income economies had engaged in discussions with international organisations about accessingemergency financing facilities. In contrast, financial conditions in China had been stable in recentweeks, and Chinese equity prices had been relatively resilient.
Movements in currencies had reflected strong demand for US dollars in the middle of March, withthe US dollar appreciating against currencies of both advanced and emerging economies. Particularlylarge moves had been observed in the exchange rates of commodity exporters. Since the start of the year, the Australian dollar had depreciated against the US dollar through to mid March to its lowestlevel since the early 2000s before partly retracing, to be around 15 per cent lower in netterms.
Domestic Financial Markets
Members reviewed the implementation of the package of policy measures announced by the Bank on19 March and its initial effects on domestic financial conditions. The package included a reductionin the cash rate target to 0.25 per cent and introduction of a target for the yield on 3-yearAustralian government bonds of around 0.25 per cent. The Bank had also announced that it wouldbe prepared to purchase government bonds across the yield curve to ensure the smooth functioning ofgovernment bond markets. In addition, the package included a term funding facility (TFF) for authoriseddeposit-taking institutions (ADIs), offering collateralised funding of at least $90 billion forthree years at an interest rate of 25 basis points, with additional amounts available toinstitutions that increase their lending to businesses, especially to small and medium-sized businesses.Finally, Exchange Settlement balances at the Bank would be remunerated at 10 basis points, ratherthan zero as would have been the case under the previous corridor arrangements.
The three-year government bond yield fell noticeably on the announcement of the policy package, fromaround 60 basis points to around 30 basis points, and declined a little further in response tobond purchases by the Bank, to be at the target of around 25 basis points. In addition to purchasesof Australian government bonds at around three years, the Bank had also purchased government bondsacross the yield curve, including state and territory government bonds. The Bank had purchased inaggregate around $36 billion of government bonds in secondary markets. This had contributed togenerally improved functioning of these markets, including a reduction in bid-ask spreads andachievement of the three-year yield target. Furthermore, the Australian Office of Financial Management(AOFM) and state and territory government borrowing authorities had issued securities, consistent withmarket conditions having improved.
Alongside these purchases, the Bank had injected around $50 billion of liquidity into thefinancial system through its daily open market operations to support credit and maintain low fundingcosts in the economy. The Bank had provided this liquidity at longer terms than usual, with the averagematurity of the Bank's repurchase agreements increasing from around 30 days to 70 days.As expected, the high level of Exchange Settlement balances had seen the cash rate decline below25 basis points, to be around 20 basis points at the time of the meeting. Market participantsexpected the cash rate to be around 15 basis points for an extended period, a little above the10 basis point deposit rate on Exchange Settlement balances.
The package of policy measures was putting downward pressure on bank funding costs, offsetting theeffects of higher spreads in some wholesale funding markets. The reduction in the cash rate and theincrease in Exchange Settlement balances had helped to lower short-term benchmark rates for bankfunding. In addition, funding was available through the TFF at substantially lower than market rates.ADIs had started to draw down their allocations under the TFF on 6 April. The TFF was beingcomplemented by other policy measures to support lending to small and medium-sized businesses, includingthe government's guarantee of 50 per cent on new loans for working capital. In addition, the AOFM had begun purchasing asset-backed securities as part of its program to support lending bynon-ADIs and small ADIs.
The Bank's package of policy measures, along with other announced initiatives by the federal andstate governments and the Australian banks, was allowing households and businesses to access credit onconsiderably more favourable terms than otherwise. Banks had reduced interest rates for small businessborrowers markedly, and small business customers affected by the COVID-19 outbreak would be able todefer interest and loan payments for six months. For households, a large proportion of the monetarypolicy easing since May 2019 had flowed through to mortgage rates paid. Lenders had reduced theirinterest rates on variable rate housing loans by 25 basis points following the reduction in thecash rate on 3 March. While most lenders did not reduce their standard variable rates following thefurther cut in the cash rate on 19 March, they had announced a reduction for interest rates onfixed rate loans and measures to defer interest and loan payments for distressed households.
Financial Stability
Members were briefed on the Bank's regular half-yearly assessment of the financial system.
The COVID-19 outbreak had ended an extended period of low financial market volatility and lowrisk premiums, which had been underpinned by investors' expectations of continued benign economicand financial market conditions. Members noted that the current situation was very different from theglobal financial crisis, as the shock had not emanated from the financial system. As a result ofregulatory reforms following the global financial crisis, banks were in a much stronger position thanprior to the global financial crisis. Members noted that, rather than being a source of the shock, thefinancial system was well placed to mitigate the impact of the pandemic.
Existing risks to financial stability were being amplified by the pandemic: debt had increased tohigh levels in corporate and household sectors in some countries; some non-bank financial institutionshad high leverage; and some European countries had weak banking systems and high sovereign debt. Bankswere also facing increased operational risks given the need to operate from split sites and with moststaff working remotely.
Members noted that the Australian banks were in a strong position to withstand the large economicshock from the COVID-19 outbreak and financial market volatility. The capital and liquiditypositions of the banks had increased substantially since the global financial crisis. Banks'leverage ratios (the ratio of Tier 1 capital to non-risk-weighted assets) had also increased. Theliquidity coverage ratios of banks were well above their regulatory minimums and had recently increasedfurther as a result of the TFF. Banks had high profits, their return on equity prior to theCOVID-19 outbreak was well above their cost of equity, and they had low rates of bad and doubtfuldebts. The expected contraction in economic activity would, however, result in a rising proportion ofnon-performing loans. But banks were well placed to absorb these, given their strong capital buffers.The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority had noted that the banks were able to access thesebuffers to sustain credit growth in the economy.
The decline in asset prices had had a significant effect on superannuation fund returns and somefunds would face additional withdrawals in the period ahead.
Following the COVID-19 outbreak, banks and other financial institutions in Australia hadimplemented their business continuity plans. This involved large numbers of staff working from home andsplit sites to ensure there was redundancy in critical operations. This had required significantadaption of their continuity plans to the specific nature of the pandemic, but to date this hadproceeded without major incident. Banks' changed operating environments and their resultingreduced capacity to take on risk had affected the functioning of some markets. There were alsoincreased risks from failures of legacy IT systems and cyber attacks.
Prior to the outbreak of COVID-19, business balance sheets in Australia were generally in a healthystate, as most companies had relatively low levels of gearing and sufficient liquid assets to weather amoderate shock to their income. Australian companies had generally deleveraged since the globalfinancial crisis. However, the contraction resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak would be a verylarge shock to many businesses, particularly in industries most exposed to the fall in economicactivity. The potential to reduce outlays through measures such as wage subsidies and rentre-negotiations, along with access to credit, were important measures to ensure the viability of asmany businesses as possible through the current crisis.
Most households with mortgages had significant buffers of accumulated prepayments, with around half ofthese loans having prepayments that exceeded six months of payments; the share of mortgages that may nothave a buffer of liquid assets was around 15 per cent. Measures of household financial stresshad been at relatively low levels prior to the COVID-19 outbreak. Members were informed that, atthe time of the meeting, banks had reported that around 5 per cent of households had enquiredabout deferring mortgage repayments.
Risks from residential property markets had diminished over the course of the preceding year asincreases in housing prices in Sydney and Melbourne had led to a reduction in the share of households atrisk of having negative equity on their housing assets. Nationally, around 3 per cent ofmortgages had negative equity positions, with most of these in Western Australia. The more recenteconomic contraction, uncertainty and social distancing measures were likely to result in very littleturnover in the housing market. It remained unclear how this would affect residential propertyprices.
Members noted that conditions in commercial property markets were deteriorating. This followed severalyears of commercial property price growth in excess of growth in rents. Prior to theCOVID-19 outbreak, parts of the retail property market were facing challenging conditions owing toweak consumer spending and heightened competition. Following the outbreak, some retail tenants had beenseeking suspensions in rent payments or large rent reductions. Members noted that the risks incommercial property markets warranted close monitoring.
International Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that the measures needed to containthe COVID-19 outbreak would result in an economic contraction that would have been unimaginable afew months earlier. The exact size of the contraction would depend on each economy's industrystructure and the public's responses. The lockdown and other containment measures were expected toremain in place for at least a couple of months in most countries, although there was considerableuncertainty about the extent of this, as well as the variability of the measures across countries.
Most official data for advanced economies had not yet captured the full effects of domestic containmentmeasures. Nonetheless, business surveys of conditions in the services sector had fallen considerablyacross most advanced economies in March and labour market indicators had also deteriorated. In theUnited States, employment had fallen sharply and new claims on unemployment insurance had increasedrapidly; the unemployment rate had increased around 1 percentage point by the time of the survey inmid March, but this was likely to have escalated significantly by the end of March.
Monthly indicators of industrial production in China had fallen sharply in January and February, consistent with more timely indicators, such as coal consumption by power plants, which had remained lowfollowing the Lunar New Year holiday. Retail sales had also fallen sharply and property markets hadeffectively shut. Through March, there had been signs of a recovery in a range of timely indicators, consistent with some easing in containment measures, although members noted that the return to morenormal conditions had been more gradual than previously expected.
The decline in economic activity following the containment measures in many economies had beenexacerbated by declines in trade and second-round income and demand effects. Accordingly, GDP wasprojected to contract by at least 10 per cent in the United States, the euro area and Chinaover a couple of quarters. The contractions in some of Australia's other trading partners, particularly in Asia, were likely to be smaller, but still significant. These estimates were in linewith those of international agencies. A number of emerging and low-income economies were in particularlyvulnerable situations because they had less capacity in their health systems and they had beenexperiencing capital outflows; there had been growing concerns that a flight of capital could trigger adeeper economic contraction in those countries.
A recovery was expected once the COVID-19 outbreak was contained, but members noted that thetiming and speed of that recovery was highly uncertain and the possibility of renewed outbreakspresented an additional downside risk. The recovery would be assisted by the very large responses ofboth monetary and fiscal policy. The fiscal responses had been designed to sustain the productivecapacity of economies during the containment measures by reducing business failures, preservingemployment and providing a level of replacement income for people who become unemployed or have theirwork hours reduced. The fiscal policy measures included: expanded unemployment benefits; direct paymentsto individuals; funding for small businesses; incentives to maintain employment; and deferments of taxpayments and other payment obligations. The fiscal response in many countries had been much larger thanduring the global financial crisis.
Most commodity prices had fallen noticeably in anticipation of weaker global demand, although prices ofthe bulk commodities most significant for Australia's export revenues had been relativelyresilient. The sharp decline in oil prices in preceding weeks had been partly a response to the declinein demand associated with the COVID-19 outbreak. But it had also partly been an independent shock, because some major producers had boosted supply for strategic reasons. For most economies, includingAustralia, lower oil prices were expected to be disinflationary in the short run and would flow throughto the price of liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports over the course of the following few quarters. Thelower oil prices had also meant that some LNG projects were now unlikely to go ahead within previouslyexpected timeframes.
Domestic Economic Developments
Members observed that most of the available domestic economic data pre-dated the COVID-19 outbreakand had been consistent with a gradual improvement in the Australian economy over 2020. In February, theunemployment rate had declined to 5.1 per cent and there had been a jump in private sectorbuilding approvals. Housing prices had also risen strongly over February and had increased over March, although market conditions deteriorated over the second half of the month.
In March, the Australian Government had announced three packages of policies focused on providingassistance to households and business. The largest package had been the JobKeeper payment announced on30 March, which would provide a wage subsidy for businesses that had experienced a significant fallin turnover. The government had also announced that it would provide cash-flow support to small andmedium-sized businesses, and investment incentives to businesses with turnover of up to$500 million. By supporting employment, these policies were expected to provide a safety net forhouseholds, helping them maintain their spending on necessities and other obligations. The governmenthad also announced that it would provide some direct transfers to households, including a temporaryincrease in the JobSeeker payment.
Members noted that the policies should cushion the labour market adjustment and reduce the financialstress of households and businesses. However, they observed that it was unlikely that these policieswould provide a strong boost to spending in the near term given the broadening shutdown of non-essentialactivities and the restrictions placed on household activities. The states and territories had alsocommitted to a number of spending packages, predominantly targeted at small and medium-sized businesses, along with providing support to households.
Retail sales had increased in February, as strength in grocery sales had offset weakness in sales ofclothing and some services. Members noted that liaison with retailers had highlighted a much largershift in household spending patterns through March as social distancing measures were put in place.Household consumption spending was expected to be much lower than usual in the June quarter becausespecific types of spending, including on travel, dining out and certain recreational services, were notpossible under the current restrictions. These estimates were in line with those for other advancedcountries subject to similar restrictions, as well as with indications of spending patterns frombusiness liaison and other private sector sources. Travel and other service exports, particularlyeducation, were also expected to remain very low for some time, on the assumption that current bordercontrols would be in place for a number of months.
Deferrals and cancellations of business investment plans had been a theme in discussions with liaisoncontacts, and recent survey indicators of business conditions had fallen sharply. These discussions hadalso highlighted that weaker demand conditions, including for short-term rental accommodation, wereexpected to extend the weakness in residential construction. These effects on GDP were expected to bepartially offset by stronger public demand and the introduction of income support measures. Incombination, these considerations suggested that GDP could fall significantly in the June quarter andremain subdued in the September quarter. Real estate, hospitality and tourism, along with many parts ofretail, essentially would not operate while the current restrictions remain in place, while someindustries, including health care, utilities and mining, would be less affected.
Members noted that there would be a very sharp decline in hours worked, which was expected to beassociated with significant increases in both the unemployment rate and the number of people workingreduced hours. Although the JobKeeper subsidy was expected to increase the number of people remainingemployed, household incomes were expected to be much lower.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
In considering the policy decision, members noted that the coordinated monetary and fiscal response, together with complementary measures taken by ADIs and other businesses, would soften the expectedeconomic contraction and help support the economy's recovery once the health crisis has passed andrestrictions have been removed. These various responses were providing considerable support toAustralian households and businesses through this very difficult period. Members noted that theAustralian financial system remained resilient. It was well capitalised and in a strong liquidityposition, with these financial buffers available to be drawn upon if required to support theeconomy.
The policy package announced by the Bank on 19 March had helped to lower funding costs andstabilise financial conditions, and would support the expected recovery. The package had contributed toan easing of strains in government bond markets and the three-year Australian government bond yield haddeclined to be at the target of around 25 basis points. The Bank would continue to do what wasnecessary to achieve the three-year yield target, with the target expected to remain in place untilprogress was being made towards its goals for full employment and inflation. The Bank would alsocontinue to promote the smooth functioning of these important markets. Members noted that, if conditionscontinued to improve, it was likely that smaller and less frequent purchases of government bonds wouldbe required.
The Bank had injected substantial liquidity into the financial system through its daily open marketoperations to support credit and maintain low funding costs in the economy. Given the substantialliquidity that was already in the system and the commencement of the TFF, daily open market operationswere likely to be on a smaller scale in the near term. Members noted that operations at longer termswould continue, but the frequency of these operations would be adjusted as necessary according to marketconditions.
The Board remained committed to supporting jobs, incomes and businesses as Australia responds to theCOVID-19 outbreak.
The Decision
The Board reaffirmed the elements of the policy package announced on 19 March 2020, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.25 per centa target of 0.25 per cent for the yield on 3-year Australian government bondsa term funding facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small and medium-sizedbusinessesan interest rate of 10 basis points on Exchange Settlement balances held by financialinstitutions at the Bank.
The Board confirmed that the target for three-year yields would be maintained until progress was madetowards the Bank's goals of full employment and the inflation target, and that it would beappropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rate itself was raised. The Board would notincrease the cash rate target until progress is made towards full employment and it is confident thatinflation will be sustainably within the 2–3 per cent target band.