Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 7 February 2023
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets), Ellis Connolly (Head, Payments Policy Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Acting Deputy Secretary)
David Jacobs (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Economic AnalysisDepartment), Michael Plumb (Head, Banking Department), Penelope Smith (Head, InternationalDepartment)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that global inflationremained very high, but looked to have peaked. Goods inflation had slowed noticeably in many advancedeconomies as supply chain and other upstream cost pressures had eased. However, services inflationremained high. Some of the strength in core inflation reflected strong domestic demand. Lower prospectivegrowth in demand was expected to reduce both goods and services inflation over time. Similarly, althoughwages growth in advanced economies remained well above the average of recent years, indications were thatit, too, might have peaked in some economies.
Members observed that a significant development for the global outlook had been the reversal in COVID-19-containment policy in China in mid-December 2022. The disruptionsfrom the final phase of restrictions in November and the wave of illness in December had led to weakactivity there in the December quarter. But early signs were that population mobility and economicactivity had recovered quickly in January. The accelerated reopening of the economy had brought forwardthe expected recovery in consumption and supply capacity in China, removing some of the downside risk tothe global outlook. Also noteworthy was that the Chinese authorities had refocused policy on supportinggrowth. Some of the announced measures would support activity in the property sector, which had been veryweak.
The earlier reopening and other policy shifts in China had also led to expectations for higher steelproduction, and had lifted prices for iron ore and coking coal. These increases stood in contrast withthe developments in most other commodity prices, which were below their recent peaks. Gas prices andthermal coal prices were sharply lower than a few months earlier, partly because favourable winterweather in Europe had reduced energy demand there. Other upstream costs, including for shipping, had alsofallen further.
Members noted that global growth had slowed during 2022, in part reflecting the end of the initialbounce-back from the pandemic. However, the synchronised global tightening in monetary policy, highenergy prices and cost-of-living pressures had also weighed on demand in the latter part of the year andwould continue to do so over the period ahead. Growth in Australia’s major trading partners wastherefore expected to remain well below its historical average over the coming two years. Some downsiderisks to growth in the major global economies had abated, including those stemming from China’sprevious approach to containing COVID-19.
Growth in consumption in the major advanced economies had slowed over 2022. Members observed thathouseholds had reduced the rate at which they were saving from current income in order to cushionconsumption as real incomes had fallen, and the buffers were diminishing. Housing markets weresubstantially weaker and had led the downturn in activity in several countries. Conditions in labourmarkets were starting to ease, though labour demand was still rising and labour markets remained verytight, with unemployment rates around historical lows and vacancy rates high.
Members acknowledged that the global outlook was subject to a number of uncertainties, and there wereplausible scenarios for both stronger and weaker growth and inflation than expected. The earlierreopening in China and clearer signs of a peak in energy prices and inflation elsewhere had focusedattention on some of the positive factors for growth. Against that, the rapid and synchronised tighteningin monetary policy could slow growth by more than expected. Regarding inflation, it could decline quicklyin the face of slower growth and improved supply conditions. On the other hand, energy prices remainedhigh, and if inflation expectations were to become de-anchored, it would be much more difficult to returninflation to target.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the discussion of the domestic economy, members observed that domestic inflation was high andbroadly based at the end of 2022. Headline inflation had reached 7.8 per cent over the year tothe December quarter. Trimmed mean inflation was 6.9 per cent over the same period, higher thanhad been expected. While global inflationary pressures had started to ease, this had yet to translatehere. An easing in inflation was expected over the months ahead, although strong domestic demand in someareas was continuing to push up prices.
Inflation in goods-related sectors remained high, with consumer durables inflation picking up in theDecember quarter, especially for clothing and vehicles. Inflation in services had picked up further, reflecting both strong demand and rising labour cost pressures, as well as the further pass-through ofearlier rises in other input costs. Increases in prices for hospitality and travel-related services hadbeen particularly pronounced. CPI rent inflation had increased further in response to tight rental marketconditions; by contrast, inflation in new dwelling construction costs had continued to moderate from highrates. Electricity and gas prices rose strongly in the quarter, partly because government subsidies haddelayed some of the increase from the preceding quarter.
Members observed that the December quarter inflation outcome pointed to there being more near-termunderlying domestic inflationary pressure than previously thought, which was reflected in the revisedforecasts. Further out, the outlook for headline and underlying inflation had been revised slightlylower, reflecting the expected effect of the Australian Government’s Energy Price Relief Plan inmitigating some of the increases in energy costs. Based on a technical assumption that the cash raterises to 3¾ per cent over time, headline inflation was expected to decline to4¾ per cent by the end of 2023 and return to around 3 per cent by mid-2025.Underlying inflation was expected to decline to around the top of the target range by the end of 2024.
Members noted that wages growth had continued to pick up. Private sector wages growth had been strongerthan expected in the September quarter and a stronger outcome than previously forecast was expected forthe December quarter. This was supported by information from liaison contacts, with around one-third ofprivate sector firms reporting wage increases above 5 per cent. Growth in the Wage Price Indexwas expected to rise to 4¼ per cent by late 2023, before easing to around 3¾ per centby mid-2025 as conditions in the labour market ease. Members noted the high degree of uncertainty aroundthis forecast.
Employment had continued to grow strongly in prior months, though not as rapidly as in the first half of2022 when the economy was reopening. Members noted that labour supply had expanded, with theparticipation rate around its historical high and an increase in net overseas arrivals over the secondhalf of the year. The unemployment rate remained at around 3½ per cent. Youth unemployment andbroader measures of labour underutilisation also remained around multi-decade lows. The unemployment ratewas expected to start picking up from around the middle of this year, to reach 4½ per cent bymid-2025. This would still be below the rates seen in the years prior to the pandemic.
Members observed that output growth had slowed during 2022 as the recovery from the pandemic had largelyrun its course. Year-ended growth was expected to slow to around 1½ per cent over 2023 and2024, as higher interest rates, the higher cost of living and declining real wealth slowed growth. Thisoutlook was largely unchanged from three months earlier.
Consumption growth was expected to slow further in coming quarters, due to both the completion of thepost-pandemic recovery and the current pressures on household finances. In particular, recent increasesin interest rates and still-high inflation would constrain real disposable incomes. Declines in netwealth, driven by lower housing prices, would also weigh on spending. Members noted that recent retailsales data indicated that growth in spending on discretionary goods had been moderating and retail tradevolumes had declined a little in the December quarter. Liaison with retailers suggested that conditionshad been mixed in January.
The outlook for business investment remained positive, supported by a large pipeline of projects. Whileshortages of materials and related supply-chain issues had eased, firms were still contending with costincreases and difficulties securing labour, particularly for construction. These factors had also slowedthe pace of dwelling investment. At the same time, demand for both detached and higher density housinghad declined. The softening in investor demand for higher density dwellings had occurred despite risingyields on units, with rental market conditions remaining tight. Immigration was expected to add to rentaldemand over the medium term, although a partial offset could be an increase in the average household sizefrom its current low levels.
Export and import volumes increased strongly over 2022, reflecting the return to international travelafter Australian travel restrictions were lifted. International travel was expected to continue torecover in coming quarters, especially now that quarantine requirements in China had been removed.Members noted that an increase in the number of foreign students in Australia partly explained recentupward revisions to population growth; their spending was also expected to lift services exports.Furthermore, the Australian economy was being supported by the relatively high terms of trade, which wereexpected to be a little higher in the near term, given the increase in some commodity prices followingChina’s reopening.
Public spending had provided significant support to the economy over prior years, in response to thepandemic and more recently from flood-related assistance. Public demand was expected to be sustained at ahigh level over the coming year; the decline in public consumption as the pandemic and flood-relatedsupport rolls off was expected to be largely offset by capital investment programs.
Members concluded their discussion of the outlook by noting several sources of risk and uncertainty. Theoutlook for domestic growth and inflation remained highly uncertain, with plausible scenarios for bothstronger and weaker outcomes. The boost to domestic activity from Australia’s high terms of tradecould be greater than expected. On the other hand, the implications of economic contractions anddisinflation elsewhere could unfold differently from the central forecast.
The competing forces affecting the outlook for consumption could net out to either stronger or weakeroutcomes than currently forecast. Members observed that monetary policy affected activity and inflationwith a lag and through several channels. The effects on the cash flows of the roughly one-third ofhouseholds with mortgages generally comes through faster than the effect on the broader economy andinflation. The effects on households were also uneven. Some households had substantial savings buffers orwere benefiting from the tight labour market and higher wages growth. It was not certain how farhouseholds would be willing to reduce current saving rates or draw down on extra savings accumulatedduring the pandemic to cushion consumption from the effects of declining real incomes; these accumulatedbuffers represented a larger share of household income in Australia than those remaining in manyeconomies. On the other hand, many households were facing tighter budgets because of higher interestrates and the rising cost of living. Moreover, it was uncertain how far the earlier substantial equitybuilt by homeowners from the run-up in housing prices would mitigate the effect of the current decline inhousing prices on future spending decisions.
Members acknowledged that the forecast decline in inflation was also subject to a number of uncertainties.The fall in global goods inflation had not yet been evident in Australia, although it was expected tooccur. It was possible that falls in goods prices in absolute terms could see inflation return to themiddle of the target range by mid-2024. However, there were also upside risks to inflation, given itscurrent broad-based nature. Price- and wage-setting behaviour could become more sensitive to strongdemand and high inflation, given that households, firms and policymakers could be more attentive torising costs when inflation is already high. There were upside risks to wages growth and it was possiblethat inflation and wage expectations could move higher, which would make the task of bringing inflationdown more difficult.
International financial markets
Members observed that central banks in several advanced economies had slowed the pace of policy rateincreases, noting signs of a moderation in inflation and economic activity, and citing the risks ofover-tightening given the lags in the transmission of monetary policy.
Market participants’ expectations for the path of policy rates in most advanced economies over theyear ahead had been little changed since the December meeting. Market pricing continued to indicate theexpectation that policy rates would peak around mid-2023 and start to decline in the second half of theyear. This was in contrast with central bank communications, which had indicated that policy settingswould likely remain restrictive for some time. Members observed that market expectations for policy ratesover 2023 and 2024 were lower in Australia than in several other advanced economies, including the UnitedStates, Canada and New Zealand.
Consistent with market expectations for policy rates, longer term government bond yields had declinedsince the start of 2023 in most major advanced economies. This reflected the declines in both longer termexpectations for central bank policy rates and longer term inflation expectations. Members observed thatmarket-implied measures of longer term inflation expectations for Australia had been stable at around2½ per cent.
Private sector financing conditions had eased in most advanced economies since the previous meeting.Equity prices in most major markets had increased and corporate bond spreads had declined, reflectingrevised expectations for global inflation, growth and policy interest rates. The removal of COVID-19 restrictions in China and a stronger policy focus on stimulatinggrowth there had also led to a repricing of financial assets in China and globally.
The US dollar had depreciated further on a trade-weighted basis over prior months, including againstthe Australian dollar. This had occurred alongside declines in US Government bond yields relative tothose of other major advanced economies. Further, the Australian dollar had been supported by morepositive risk sentiment and higher prices for some key commodity exports following the reopening of theChinese economy.
Members observed that the Australian dollar was around the same level as a year earlier on atrade-weighted basis. Members noted that, all else equal, tighter domestic monetary policy would usuallyresult in an exchange rate appreciation; however, this had not occurred because other central banks hadalso been tightening monetary policy. Nonetheless, the synchronised policy tightening would result inlower global inflation than otherwise, which would place downward pressure on domestic inflation.
Domestic financial markets
Members observed that earlier increases in the cash rate were continuing to be transmitted to broaderfinancial conditions. Housing credit had continued to slow and housing prices had declined further.Business credit growth had also slowed more recently. New loan commitments had declined, indicating thata further slowing in both housing and business credit growth was likely in the months ahead.
Banks’ overall funding costs had continued to rise. The cash rate increase in December 2022 had beenpassed through in full to standard variable home loan rates, as had been the case in preceding months.However, the average home loan rates actually paid by borrowers had risen by less than the cash rate over2022, as competition had remained strong for good borrowers. Borrowers were seeking better deals on theirhome loans, for variable-rate loans as well as expiring fixed-rate loans, and a record share of mortgageswere being refinanced with a different lender.
The full effects of the increase in interest rates were yet to be felt in mortgage payments. Members notedthat about half of remaining fixed-rate loans, taken out during the pandemic at low interest rates, weredue to roll off in 2023 onto higher rates. Taking account of this, and market expectations for furtherincreases in the cash rate, households’ required mortgage repayments were projected to reach arecord level as a share of household incomes.
Members observed that households had accumulated substantial additional savings over the course of thepandemic. This stock of savings was estimated to be larger than in most other advanced economies(relative to households’ disposable income). However, these additional savings might not bedistributed evenly across households and it was unclear how and if these additional savings would beused.
More generally, members noted that the full effects of monetary policy tightening on activity andinflation occurred through a range of channels in addition to rising mortgage payments. These otherchannels include the effect of higher interest rates on asset prices, the exchange rate, the incentivefor people to save, expectations of the future, access to finance and business investment plans.
Members noted that financial market pricing implied a further 25 basis point increase in the cashrate at the current meeting. The market-implied path for the cash rate had shifted slightly higherfollowing the recent inflation data, and now indicated an expected peak of around 3¾ per centby mid-2023. Accordingly, longer term yields on Australian Government Securities had risen a little sincethe December meeting. Market economists also expected further increases in the cash rate.
The future of money and payments
Members discussed a paper on the future of money and the Bank’s work agenda in the payments area.They noted the ongoing trend away from the use of banknotes towards electronic methods of payment and theassociated growth in interest around the world in central bank digital currencies (CBDCs). Membersdiscussed the implications of a retail CBDC for the structure of the financial system, the operation andtransmission of monetary policy, and the Bank’s balance sheet. The staff’s view is that thereis not yet a clear public policy case to issue a retail CBDC, but such a case could emerge. Australia hasa modern and well-functioning payments system, which meets most of the needs of households andbusinesses; there is good access to banknotes for those who wish to use a publicly provided form of moneyfor making payments or storing value; and there is significant innovation in the payments system atpresent, including the adoption of fast payments services.
Members supported the Bank’s ongoing research on CBDC, which is focused on understanding thepotential use cases and economic benefits of introducing a CBDC. In 2022, the Bank commenced acollaborative research project with the Digital Finance Cooperative Research Centre, which involves theissuance of a limited-scale pilot CBDC that is a real digital claim on the Bank. Industry participants inthe pilot will be able to explore how a CBDC could be used to provide innovative payment and settlementservices to households and businesses. The industry response to the project had been very positive, witha broad range of industry participants submitting use cases. A report on the findings will be publishedby the Bank around mid-year.
Members also noted the ongoing work of the Bank, under the oversight of the Payments System Board, topromote the efficiency, competitiveness and safety of the payments system. The Bank is focused onpromoting competition in the card payments market, encouraging the delivery of new functionality on theNew Payments Platform, and improving the speed and reducing the cost of cross-border payments.
Considerations for monetary policy
Prior to considering the policy decision, members noted that inflation in Australia remained too high andthat the incoming data on prices and labour costs had tended to exceed expectations. While a significantpart of this was attributable to global factors, strong domestic demand relative to the ability of theeconomy to meet that demand was also an important contributing factor. Members observed that inflationwas likely to have reached its peak in the December quarter, but this could only be confirmed in a fewmonths’ time. Trends in inflation in other countries contributed to this expectation. The centralforecast was for inflation to decline to within the target range over coming years, but the pace andextent of decline remained uncertain. Medium-term inflation expectations remained well anchored andmembers agreed that it was important this remain the case.
The Australian economy grew at a solid pace over the second half of 2022. However, growth had slowed morerecently and the outlook was for a further slowing. Growth in consumption, in particular, was expected tobe subdued in 2023 as the post-pandemic recovery wanes, higher prices and household interest paymentsconstrain real disposable incomes and falls in housing prices reduce net wealth. Interest rates onvariable-rate home loans had risen substantially over preceding months and required mortgage paymentswere projected to reach their highest level on record (as a share of household disposable income).Nonetheless, members noted that measures indicate the extra savings accumulated in Australia over thepreceding three years were very large. There were plausible scenarios in which consumption growth slowedby even more than forecast, as well as scenarios in which it was more resilient.
Members observed that unemployment was at its lowest level in nearly 50 years and that the number ofjob vacancies remained very high, even if somewhat less than in prior months. The Australian economy wasbenefiting from higher terms of trade and would benefit more than a number of other countries fromChina’s reopening.
In light of these considerations and turning to the policy decision, members agreed that a furtherincrease in interest rates was warranted. The recent inflation data had suggested more breadth andpersistence in inflation than had been expected and that strong demand was leading to price increases insome parts of the economy. While inflation was expected to decline, there was a risk that it couldpersist at an uncomfortably high level, which would entail longer term costs.
Members also noted that the cash rate was lower than policy rates in many other comparable economies.While wages growth remained lower here than elsewhere, Australia’s positive exposure to highercommodity prices and the extra savings buffers accumulated by households were estimated to be larger thanin other countries. There were also notable differences in fiscal policy and population growth around theglobe. Members observed that the cash-flow channel of monetary policy was stronger in Australia than inother countries, given the high level of variable-rate debt. But members also observed that, after takingaccount of all the channels for monetary policy transmission, there was little evidence to suggest thatthe overall impact of monetary policy on activity and inflation in Australia was materially differentthan elsewhere.
The Board considered two options for its policy decision: a 50 basis point increase; and a25 basis point increase.
The arguments for a 50 basis point increase stemmed from the concern that there had been a pattern ofincoming prices and wages data exceeding expectations, and a risk that high inflation would bepersistent. If it did persist, there would be significant costs, including higher interest rates and alarger increase in unemployment later on. Relatedly, members observed that the longer inflation stayedhigh, the greater the risk of price and wage expectations moving higher.
The arguments for a 25 basis point increase also recognised the need to bring demand and supply inthe economy more into balance, but noted that inflation was expected to have reached its peak, that theoutlook was for a softening in consumption growth and that there were many uncertainties around theoutlook. Members observed that, while underlying inflation had been higher than previously forecast, headline inflation was below earlier expectations. The forecast was for inflation to fall within thetarget range by the end of the forecast period in mid-2025. Many households were facing tighter budgetsand, in aggregate, real incomes were falling. There were plausible scenarios in which consumption growthwas weaker than expected and inflation fell faster than forecast, as well as scenarios in which theopposite occurred.
Members acknowledged that there were arguments in favour of both options, but concluded that the case toincrease the cash rate by 25 basis points at the present meeting was the stronger one. Members notedthe uncertainty around the outlook and that the monthly meetings provided the Board with frequentopportunities to assess how these uncertainties were being resolved and to adjust policy if needed. Withinterest rates already having been adjusted substantially, there was less need to move by 50 basispoints at this meeting.
Members noted that the forecasts for output and inflation had been prepared on the technical assumption ofthe cash rate reaching around 3¾ per cent. Consistent with this, members agreed that furtherincreases in interest rates are likely to be needed over the months ahead to ensure that inflationreturns to target and that the current period of high inflation is only temporary. In assessing how muchfurther interest rates might need to increase, the Board will continue to evaluate developments in theglobal economy, trends in household spending and unemployment, the evolution of labour costs and theprice-setting behaviour of firms.
The Board is seeking to return inflation to the 2–3 per centtarget range while keeping the economy on an even keel. The path here is a narrow one and there are risksin both directions. The Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target andwill do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 3.35 per cent. Italso increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to3.25 per cent.