Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 7 September 2021
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Jonathan Kearns(Head, Financial Stability Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that momentum in theglobal economic recovery had eased in recent months. The global recovery also remained uneven, reflectingcross-country differences in policy support and vaccination rates. However, by year end, output in manyeconomies was expected to have recovered to, or surpassed, pre-pandemic levels.
In countries with high vaccination rates, the recovery had been supported by the lifting of restrictionson mobility in recent months; rates of hospitalisation and recent deaths were relatively low despite anincrease in case numbers of COVID-19. Consumption of services in the UnitedStates, Canada and several European countries had largely recovered from earlier declines, withhigh-frequency indicators of activity in the services sector (such as retail foot traffic and restaurantdining) returning to around pre-pandemic levels.
Members noted that unemployment rates in advanced economies had continued to decline over recent months.Demand for labour was high, although the supply of labour had been slower to respond to the lifting ofrestrictions, particularly in the services sector; these mismatches were contributing to pockets oflabour shortages and wage pressures in some industries. Overall, wages growth had picked up in the UnitedStates, the United Kingdom and New Zealand, but remained modest in the euro area and Canada. Membersnoted that there was higher-than-usual uncertainty surrounding projections of spare capacity in thelabour market, reflecting government support schemes and the medium-term effects of COVID-19 on labour supply.
Headline consumer price inflation remained high in advanced economies and it was likely that global supplychain disruptions would be more persistent than initially envisaged. Strong demand for goods continued toresult in long supply times and high container freight rates. This had been exacerbated recently bydisruptions to supply caused by virus outbreaks in key international trading ports. Members noted thatonce pandemic-related shocks to demand and supply begin to subside, the transitory inflationary pressureswould ease and inflation would depend mostly on the extent of spare capacity in the labour market and thespeed at which it was absorbed. Central banks' forecasts were for inflation to decline over thefollowing year, and measures of underlying inflation and medium-term inflation expectations were broadlyin line with central banks' targets in many advanced economies.
Members noted that health and economic outcomes across emerging Asian economies had been mixed in recentmonths. An increase in case numbers had prompted renewed containment measures in some countries in Asia.Restrictions in some middle-income east Asian countries had recently led to sharp declines in populationmobility, which were expected to have dampened services activity in affected regions. Intermittentrestrictions had also continued to weigh on activity in high-income east Asian countries. In contrast, mobility in India had recovered substantially as the earlier outbreak of the Delta variant of COVID-19 subsided, pointing to a strong recovery in economic activity in theSeptember quarter.
Members noted that data on economic activity in China had softened in recent months and the outlook hadbecome more uncertain than it had been for some time. Low tolerance for the community spread of COVID-19 had resulted in intermittent targeted lockdowns and restrictions onmovement, which had weighed on activity and been disruptive for some key ports. There was alsouncertainty about the effects of a range of recent policy measures, including those aimed at curbingfinancial stability risks, reducing carbon emissions and achieving broader social objectives.
The price of iron ore had fallen from high levels in recent times as Chinese authorities intensifiedefforts to restrict steel production. However, prices for coal and liquefied natural gas had continued toincrease in recent months alongside strength in industrial output in China and elsewhere, and a boost toelectricity demand from an unseasonably warm northern hemisphere summer. As a result, Australia'sterms of trade were likely to remain at a high level in the September quarter, after reaching a recordhigh in the June quarter.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic developments, members noted that the national accounts confirmed the recoveryhad established strong momentum prior to the recent outbreak of the Delta variant of COVID-19. Domestic final demand increased by 1.7 per cent in theJune quarter, to be 3.2 per cent above its pre-pandemic level. Growth in household consumptionof just over 1 per cent in the quarter had been led by a rebound in the consumption ofservices. Growth in dwelling investment had slowed in response to capacity constraints, with a largepipeline of work still to be completed. Growth in business investment of around 2 per cent hadbeen led by non-mining investment, while mining investment had declined in the quarter. Overall, GDPincreased by 0.7 per cent in the June quarter, broadly in line with the most recent set of Bankforecasts, as strong growth in private and public consumption and investment had been partly offset by adecline in resource exports.
The outbreak of the Delta variant had interrupted the recovery in a manner that was more severe thanexpected a month earlier. While private demand had increased solidly in the June quarter, the spread ofthe Delta variant in New South Wales and Victoria had set back the recovery and created uneven conditionsacross states and industries. GDP was expected to decline materially in the Septemberquarter; the near-term outlook resembled the downside scenario presented in the most recent forecasts.Measures of population mobility in New South Wales and Victoria had declined to around the low levelsreached during earlier lockdowns. As in previous lockdowns, household consumption had been curtailed byreduced opportunities for households to spend. Dwelling and business investment were also likely todecline in the September quarter in response to restrictions in New South Wales and Victoria. Informationfrom the Bank's liaison program suggested that restrictions affecting the construction industry coulddelay activity for a period, with limited scope to make up for this in light of ongoing capacityconstraints.
Conditions in the established housing market had remained more robust in recent months compared with theMelbourne lockdown in the second half of 2020. Nevertheless, growth in housing prices had slowed a littlein Sydney and Melbourne following the rapid increases over the first half of 2021. Housing prices hadcontinued to increase strongly in most other markets. Growth in advertised rents also remained strong inmost capital cities and regional areas. Building approvals data indicated that demand for new housing andalterations and additions had continued to ease after the conclusion of the HomeBuilder applicationperiod, but remained high compared with pre-pandemic activity.
Consistent with the effect of the lockdowns on activity, members assessed that further improvement in thelabour market would be delayed. Hours worked and employment were little changed in July at a nationallevel, but this masked the offsetting effects of declines in New South Wales and a recovery in Victoriafrom a previous lockdown early in June. Large declines in hours worked and employment were expected inboth states in coming months before rebounding later in the year. Members noted that workers in New SouthWales and Victoria who were stood down without pay for longer than four weeks were likely to beclassified as not employed even if they were still attached to their employer; this differed from thetreatment of workers who were stood down but received the JobKeeper payment in 2020, and would affectmeasured employment while restrictions remained in place. The decline in the unemployment rate in Julywas mainly due to people exiting the labour force. Alternative measures, which included employees workingzero hours, rose in July and further increases were expected in the near term as more workers are stooddown for longer than four weeks. Members noted that the measured unemployment rate would be a less usefulindicator of labour market underutilisation over coming months compared with hours-based measures.
Members also noted that, prior to the recent outbreak of the Delta variant, notwithstanding the strongrebound in economic activity and employment, there had been little sign of upward pressure on wagesgrowth. Increases in the Wage Price Index in the June quarter were modest for almost all industries, including those where there had been some reports of labour shortages amid strong labour demand, such asconstruction and mining. Business liaison suggested that most firms did not expect the recent lockdownsto have a significant effect on wages growth in the year ahead.
Beyond the September quarter, members agreed that the timing and pace of the rebound in economic activitywould depend largely on the lifting of restrictions in response to health outcomes. Vaccination rates hadbeen increasing swiftly in the period leading up to the meeting, especially in New South Wales. Asvaccination coverage increased, this would allow restrictions to be eased and recovery from the recentsetback to begin in the December quarter. As restrictions were likely to be lifted gradually, therecovery could be slower than experienced earlier in the pandemic, when the end of community transmissionof COVID-19 allowed for a more rapid lifting of restrictions. It waspossible that precautionary behaviour by households and firms after lengthy lockdowns would alsocontribute to a slower rebound, although there had been little evidence of this from the internationalexperience or from domestic spending patterns outside of lockdown areas. Information from liaison alsosuggested that many firms were preparing to look beyond the near-term uncertainty and were committing toprevious hiring and investment decisions. In the central scenario, activity was expected to return to itspre-Delta path in the second half of 2022, with the health situation the key source of uncertainty aroundthis scenario.
Members agreed that the substantial increase in pandemic support by the Australian Government and stateand territory governments would be one of the factors supporting the recovery into 2022. This support wasmore targeted than earlier in the pandemic, but for many individuals the COVID-19 disaster relief payments were offering the same level of incomesupport as the earlier JobKeeper payments. This income support was expected to boost the household savingrate in the near term, and would eventually boost consumption when restrictions are eased later in theyear. Business support grants, payroll tax deferrals and rental forbearance had also supported the cashflows of many businesses affected by lockdowns. More generally, members noted that business conditionsacross and within states remained uneven, with some industries experiencing very challenging conditions, while others, including professional services, appeared to have weathered the recent period reasonablywell.
International financial markets
Globally, financial conditions remained highly accommodative. Yields on long-term government bonds hadrisen a little over the previous month, having declined significantly in prior months as the spread ofthe Delta variant of COVID-19 moderated optimism about the global economicrecovery. In general, yields on shorter-term bonds had remained at low levels.
Some central banks in advanced economies had reduced their highly stimulatory policy settings or signalledthey would soon start doing so. The Bank of Korea had raised its policy rate in August, citing risinginflationary pressures and a desire to curb financial imbalances. Members noted that the Reserve Bank ofNew Zealand (RBNZ) had also been expected to increase its policy rate in August, but had chosen to holdthe rate steady given the policy meeting had been held shortly after a lockdown had been announced. TheRBNZ had indicated that an increase in its policy rate would be appropriate soon because the economy isexperiencing capacity constraints, inflationary pressures are building and inflation is near theRBNZ's target. The RBNZ had also signalled that it was considering further restrictions on highloan-to-value lending in response to rapid growth in housing prices and housing credit.
Members noted that market pricing implied that market participants were expecting the Bank of Canada andthe Bank of England to start increasing their policy rates around mid 2022. Both central banks werewidely expected to have ceased net asset purchases by that time. For the United States, most members ofthe Federal Open Market Committee had indicated that a reduction in the pace of the Federal Reserve'sasset purchases was likely to be appropriate before the end of the year, given the progress that had beenmade towards its macroeconomic goals. Market pricing suggested that the conditions the Federal Reservehad set itself for raising its policy rate were unlikely to be met before 2023.
Financing conditions for corporations in advanced economies had remained favourable. Over the precedingmonth, equity markets in advanced economies had been around all-time or post-pandemic highs, including inAustralia, supported by the recent strength in earnings. The spread between yields on corporate bonds andyields on government bonds had generally remained narrow.
In China, some weaker-than-expected economic data suggested downside risks to the economic outlook, whichhad increased expectations for a further easing in monetary policy. Members noted that a number of risksto the outlook for growth and financial stability were receiving attention in China. In particular, regulatory changes aimed at reducing leverage among real estate developers, as well as restrictions ondemand for real estate, had led to slower construction activity and liquidity difficulties for some largeproperty developers. This had led to a heightened risk of fire sales of assets and raised concerns aboutthe potential for financial stability issues. There had also been a tightening of regulation in someother sectors, notably information technology and private education. This had resulted in significantdeclines in the share prices of affected firms, particularly those listed in offshore markets.
Financial conditions in other emerging markets had generally remained stable, despite rising COVID-19 case numbers in many countries. Central banks in a number of emergingmarket economies, including Brazil, Mexico and Russia, had increased their policy rates since early 2021in response to high and rising inflation, and were expected to increase their policy rates further beforethe end of the year. Inflation in Asia had remained relatively well contained, but some central banks inthe region were expected to start increasing policy rates in the near future. Bank Indonesia hadannounced it would purchase more government debt in the primary debt market in a burden-sharingarrangement to support government spending on COVID-19 response measures, following a similar arrangement in 2020. Members noted that the recent allocation of Special DrawingRights by the International Monetary Fund was expected to be used by some emerging market economies toaccess additional foreign exchange, partly to assist with their COVID-19policy responses.
Although there had been little change in the Australian dollar exchange rate from a month earlier, theAustralian dollar had depreciated over the course of 2021 both against the US dollar and intrade-weighted terms. Over the year to date, the difference between interest rates in Australia and inother major advanced economies had declined, while most commodity prices had increased.
Domestic financial markets
Domestically, interest rates on outstanding home and business loans had edged down to new lows, as newloans and refinancing of existing loans were taken out at lower rates than existing loans. Housing loancommitments remained at high levels and overall credit growth had picked up further in July insix-month-ended annualised terms. Members noted that the current lockdowns were likely to affect demandfor new loans in the coming months. The recent strength in banks' lending to businesses had followeda period of little change since late in 2020 and was mirrored by a pick-up in other forms of businessdebt issuance, including corporate bonds. Banks had offered targeted support to those household andbusiness borrowers affected by lockdown measures, and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority(APRA) had provided regulatory relief for this support. To date, the uptake of payment deferrals byhouseholds and businesses had been much lower than in the previous year.
Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities (AGS) had been little changed over the preceding monthbut had declined relative to US 10-year yields since June, leaving a gap of around 10 basispoints. Short-term yields on AGS out to the April 2024 bond had remained very low and in some cases hadfallen a little below zero. In part, this had reflected the effects of the Bank's policies, includingthe bond purchases, which had contributed to further rises in system liquidity.
The Bank had completed the $200 billion of purchases under its bond purchase program at the time ofthe meeting. Around half of surveyed market economists expected the Bank to maintain the pace of bondpurchases at $5 billion per week, in light of the economic effects of recent lockdowns and othercontainment measures. A similar proportion expected the Bank to taper purchases to $4 billion perweek as was announced following the July 2021 meeting.
Expectations for the cash rate in the near term had been little changed. Market pricing continued tosuggest that market participants expected the cash rate target to be increased to 25 basis pointsaround the end of 2022.
Members reviewed the Term Funding Facility (TFF) following its closure to new drawdowns at the end of June2021. The $188 billion of low-cost funding that had been drawn under the TFF will continue tosupport low borrowing costs until mid 2024. Business credit had held up since early 2020, which wasa better outcome than seen in earlier periods of sizeable contractions in economic activity in Australia, when business credit had declined noticeably. The TFF had contributed to lower funding costs for banks, which had been passed through to lower borrowing rates. This suggested that the TFF had provided, andwould continue to provide, significant support to the economy. Members noted that the banks' task ofrefinancing the maturing funding from the TFF in around three years' time would be sizeable, butmanageable. Australian banks had issued similarly large volumes of bonds as a share of assets in thepast, and currently have the capacity to smooth their funding arrangements.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the Australian economy had considerable momentumprior to the outbreak of the Delta variant of COVID-19. Business investmenthad been picking up and the labour market had strengthened, with the unemployment rate falling further inJune. However, despite the strong economic and labour market outcomes, wage and price pressures hadremained subdued.
The outbreak of the Delta variant had delayed, but not derailed, the recovery. GDP was expected to declinematerially in the September quarter and the unemployment rate was expected to rise, but the economy wasexpected to bounce back as vaccination rates increase and restrictions are eased. However, there wasconsiderable uncertainty about the timing and pace of the recovery, which was likely to be slower thanexperienced earlier in 2021. Much would depend on the health situation and the easing of restrictions onactivity. In the central scenario, the economy would return to growth in the December quarter and to itspre-Delta path in the second half of 2022. Wages growth and underlying inflation were expected to pick-upgradually as the economy recovers.
Members noted that very accommodative financial conditions were supporting the recovery. Borrowing rateswere at record lows, sovereign bond yields were at very low levels and the exchange rate had depreciatedover preceding months. Members noted also that housing prices had continued to rise. Housing creditgrowth had increased, reflecting stronger demand for credit from both owner-occupiers and investors.Given the environment of rising housing prices and low interest rates, members continued to emphasise theimportance of maintaining lending standards and carefully monitoring trends in borrowing.
Members discussed the implications of the outbreak of the Delta variant for the Bank's bond purchaseprogram.
As part of their discussion, members considered the roles of fiscal and monetary policy in response to thecurrent shock. They observed that fiscal policy is the more appropriate policy instrument for dealingwith a temporary and sharp reduction in private sector incomes. In this context, they welcomed the fiscalresponses by the Australian Government and the state and territory governments in supporting householdand business balance sheets. While acknowledging that monetary policy can do little more to offset thistype of temporary shock to aggregate demand, members recognised that the outbreak of the Delta variantwas delaying the recovery and had added to the uncertainty about the future. As a result, progresstowards the Bank's goals was likely to take longer and was less assured. In response, members judgedthat a modification to the previously announced plans was appropriate.
Two modifications were considered. The first was to maintain the recent rate of purchases at$5 billion a week to at least November 2021 and then review the program. The second was to taperpurchases to $4 billion as had been announced, but to extend the period over which bonds would bepurchased at this rate to mid February 2022. With the economy expected to return to its pre-Delta path bymid 2022, members assessed that, on balance, tapering remained appropriate. The Board also tookaccount of the fact that a number of other central banks are tapering their bond purchases. In addition, at $4 billion a week, the Bank's bond purchase program is expanding faster relative to the stockof bonds outstanding than that of many other central banks. The Board also saw value in providing greaterclarity regarding bond purchases after November 2021.
The Board therefore decided on the second option – namely, to purchase bonds at $4 billion aweek until at least mid February 2022. The Board will continue to review the bond purchase program inlight of economic conditions and the health situation, and their implications for the expected progresstowards full employment and inflation reaching the target. The bond purchases – together with thelow level of the cash rate, the yield target and the funding under the TFF – were providingsubstantial and ongoing support to the Australian economy.
The Board remains committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve a return tofull employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. It will not increase the cash rateuntil actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. The centralscenario for the economy is that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting this condition willrequire the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than itwas at the time of the meeting.
The decision
The Board decided upon the following policy settings:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlementbalances of zero per centmaintain the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bondpurchase government securities at the rate of $4 billion a week and to continue the purchases atthis rate until at least mid February 2022.
Other policy matters
The Board discussed the Bank's arrangements for Exceptional Liquidity Assistance (ELA). This wasprompted by ongoing developments in the international regulatory architecture, where it has becomeincreasingly common for central banks to provide more detailed information on ELA arrangements to assistbanks in their contingency planning. This transparency can assist banks in their recovery and resolutionplanning and thereby support financial stability. In Australia, APRA intends to release its newprudential framework for recovery and resolution for consultation later in 2021. Australia'sfinancial institutions currently have high liquidity buffers and are strongly capitalised. Against thisbackground, the Board discussed current arrangements for ELA in Australia.
The provision of ELA to illiquid but solvent banks is a core responsibility of central banks. While eachfinancial institution is responsible for managing its own liquidity, situations can arise when theprovision of liquidity to a specific institution by the central bank can be in the public interest. Doingso can reduce unnecessary disruptions to the financial system and help preserve financial stability.
The regulatory framework for authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) in Australia anticipates thatinstitutions may at times face unexpected outflows or difficulty accessing liquidity. ADIs are requiredto maintain holdings of liquid assets above a regulatory minimum and to plan how they would respond toliquidity stress. Larger ADIs are also expected to hold additional ‘contingent liquidity’assets that could be used in a crisis situation to access liquidity from the Bank via repurchaseagreements (repos) of self-securitised mortgages – that is, debt securities backed by pools ofmortgages created and held by ADIs specifically to be used in repos with the Bank.
In situations of market-wide liquidity stress, the Bank can boost system-wide liquidity through openmarket operations, reducing uncertainty about the availability of liquidity in the banking system andcontributing to a lower cost of liquidity than otherwise. The Bank has done this on multiple occasions inthe past, notably during the global financial crisis and during a period of pandemic-related stress inMarch and April 2020.
However, where liquidity pressures arise in an individual institution, or in parts of the financial systemwhere open market operations are less well suited, the Bank can consider providing ELA directly toindividual financial institutions. Liquidity risk has generally been well managed by ADIs, which suggeststhat the provision of ELA would be exceptionally rare.
While risk to the Bank from providing ELA is managed by holding collateral, with appropriate‘haircuts’, the Bank would consider providing ELA only if it was considered to be in thepublic interest. Further, it would need to be clear that the recipient was experiencing acute liquiditydifficulties and had made reasonable efforts to obtain liquidity from private sources, and the Bank wouldneed to judge that the entity was solvent. The recipient would be expected to have informed its regulatorof its liquidity concerns before approaching the Bank, and the Bank would liaise closely with theregulator in making judgements about the entity's situation and solvency. The provision of ELA andthe terms of that assistance would be at the Bank's discretion.
The focus of liquidity support is generally on ADIs, but in principle it could also be provided to adomestic clearing and settlement facility, where the facility is unable to obtain liquidity from itscollateral holdings for market or operational reasons. This could occur either as part of thefacility's normal default management arrangements, or during recovery or resolution whenextraordinary measures were being taken to secure the facility's viability. The arrangements forproviding liquidity would be broadly similar to those for ADIs.
Members endorsed the proposal for the Bank to publish information on its website regarding technicalrequirements and other considerations for ELA, in order to increase the transparency of ELA arrangements.This information will note the Bank's expectation that entities should: inform their regulator of anyliquidity concerns and their intention to request ELA before approaching the Bank; have made reasonableefforts to obtain liquidity from the private sector; and be able to demonstrate their solvency. It willalso emphasise that the Bank retains full discretion over the provision and terms of ELA. As in othercountries, this information will assist institutions with their recovery and resolution plans.