Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 7 July 2020
Members Participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
Others Participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, FinancialMarkets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, InternationalDepartment), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic MarketsDepartment)
International Economic Developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that, after a severe contractionin activity, conditions had started to improve following the easing of restrictions imposed in responseto the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the number of new COVID-19 cases was rising rapidly insome countries, notably the United States and some emerging market economies. Restrictions had beeneased in some countries despite new COVID-19 cases increasing or remaining at high levels. Giventhese developments, risks to the outlook for the world economy had increased recently despite theeconomic data having been on an improving path over the preceding couple of months as restrictions hadbeen eased. Members noted that the sustainability of the economic recovery would depend in large parton health outcomes and ongoing policy support.
GDP for the March quarter had contracted sharply in a number of countries. The severity of thecontraction reflected the timing of the lockdown in each country, its intensity and the types ofindustries and activities that had been locked down. The decline in activity in the services sector hadbeen particularly pronounced across countries.
Members noted that survey measures of business conditions had improved in June across severaleconomies. Activity in the services sector had recovered more than manufacturing in June, but generallyremained weak. The recovery in business conditions appeared to have been strongest in the United Statesand China.
A range of indicators pointed to economic conditions continuing to normalise in China. Industrialactivity and most property-related activity had returned to levels prevailing prior to theCOVID-19 outbreak. However, consumer spending and travel-related activity remained well belowtypical levels. In India, employment had recovered strongly, alongside an increase in newCOVID-19 cases. In general, high-frequency indicators in India suggested that people wererestricting all but essential travel.
Members observed that household consumption in the June quarter was likely to have been very weakglobally. Consumers had been substituting away from services in favour of goods, and from internationalservices to domestic retail goods, in particular. In advanced economies, retail sales values in May hadrecovered most or all of the decline in April; in China, retail sales had been recovering sincenationwide restrictions were lifted in February.
The contraction in activity in the global economy had been accompanied by a very severe deteriorationin labour market conditions. Members noted that government policies were offering substantial supportto labour markets around the world. A large share of the labour force in advanced economies wassupported by wage subsidy programs. Maintaining workers' attachment to their employers waspreventing a large increase in measured unemployment. Government support measures were also helping tosustain household incomes. In the United States, aggregate household income had increased in recentmonths, in part owing to increases in unemployment insurance, which had raised the incomes of manyunemployed people. Definitional differences had contributed to wide cross-country variation in recordedunemployment rates. For instance, in the United States the unemployment rate had risen most and thendeclined fastest because people who were temporarily stood down (and immediately classified asunemployed) had more recently returned to work.
Domestic Economic Developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that economic conditions in Australia had weakenedsignificantly since the start of the year, but the downturn had been less severe than feared a fewmonths earlier. Consumer spending in May and June had been stronger than expected, and had also held upbetter than in most other countries. Manufacturing and construction activity had also been less affectedin Australia than elsewhere. Similarly, the contraction in the labour market had been less severe thanexpected in May. Nevertheless, the shock to the Australian economy would be the most severe since the1930s, and the outlook remained highly uncertain as it depended in large part upon containment of thepandemic.
Household consumption had declined by around 1 per cent in the March quarter, and wasexpected to have contracted considerably more sharply in the June quarter. Reduced spending oninternational travel was likely to account for a material share of the fall in household consumption.Members noted that the restrictions imposed had also significantly dampened non-retail consumption, including of personal services, in the June quarter. While consumption of services, especiallydiscretionary services, had been weak since March, the value of retail sales, which accounts forone-third of consumption, was higher in May than levels before the COVID-19 outbreak. This partlyreflected substitution away from services where restrictions were applied in favour of goods such asfood, household items and recreational items. Vehicle sales had also picked up markedly in June, afterhaving fallen considerably in April. Across the states, growth in retail spending had been most subduedin Victoria; states where numbers of active COVID-19 cases were very low had seen larger increasesin retail sales.
Imports and exports had both been lower in May, leaving the trade surplus broadly unchanged at ahistorically high level. The decline in imports had been broadly based and consistent with weakness inoverall consumption. While exports of resources had declined only marginally, members observed that thevalue of services exports had contracted sharply in recent months, with travel exports nearly halving invalue and transport service exports also declining. Around two-thirds of travel service exports areeducation-related, including the tuition and living expenses of international students, with tourismaccounting for the remaining third. It was noted that the full effect of the closure of Australia'sinternational borders would be evident in the June quarter rather than the March quarter. Meanwhile, consumer and business confidence, and surveys of business conditions, had picked up as restrictions onactivity were eased.
Members noted that fiscal policy was playing a key role in supporting economic activity and the labourmarket in Australia and elsewhere. Domestically and abroad, this policy support had included directpayments to households and businesses, increased spending on health services, wage subsidies and loanguarantees. In Australia, government assistance – particularly the JobKeeper and JobSeekerprograms – was playing an important role in supporting household incomes and consumption.Mortgage payment forbearance, rental reductions and withdrawals from superannuation balances had alsosupported household cash flows in the June quarter and into the September quarter. Superannuationwithdrawals had been significant, equivalent to around 6 per cent of quarterly householdincome, with more than 3 million requests filed to date.
Conditions in the labour market had been very weak, but not as severe as expected a few months earlier.Another large decline in employment in May had brought the number of people who had lost their job overtwo months to 835, 000. The unemployment rate had risen by 0.7 percentage points to7.1 per cent in May. As had been the case in April, an unusually large share of people wholeft employment in May did not actively search for work and were therefore recorded as having exited thelabour force. Members noted that the employment-to-population ratio and the participation rate had bothfallen significantly and were at their lowest levels in many years. Underemployment had eased in May, albeit from a very high level, as more people resumed working longer hours. As with employment, totalhours worked declined again in May but by less than in April. The peak-to-trough decline in total hoursworked was now expected to be closer to 10 per cent than the 20 per cent declineexpected earlier. Payroll data indicated that job losses were reversing gradually in those industriesmost directly affected by the restrictions on activity, such as accommodation, cafes and restaurants.Jobs in other industries that had also been affected, such as business services, had yet to recovermaterially. Payroll data also suggested that the worst of the job losses was likely to have passed.
Members noted that conditions in the established housing market remained mixed. Housing prices in somelarger cities had declined in June, though were only a little below recent peaks in the case of Sydneyand Melbourne. Housing prices in a number of smaller cities were broadly unchanged. Housing turnoverdeclined significantly when in-person auctions and open homes were banned owing to physical distancingrestrictions, but as these were lifted turnover had recovered somewhat. Conditions in the rental marketremained weak, partly reflecting an increase in the supply of rental housing in some areas. The reducedflow of new arrivals to Australia was also affecting some markets. Rental vacancy rates had increasedsharply in Melbourne and Sydney to just above 4 per cent. Soft conditions in the rental marketwere expected to weigh on rent inflation for some time.
Investment activity in the residential and non-mining business sectors had been subdued and wasexpected to remain so for some time. Members noted that uncertainty about job losses had affected thedemand for new housing, and building approvals had declined, particularly for apartments. Liaisoncontacts had indicated that the recently announced HomeBuilder package had provided a boost to buyerinterest in the detached housing market, but less so for apartments. Non-mining business investment hadbeen weak prior to the onset of the pandemic, and indications from liaison contacts suggested it wouldweaken further in the period ahead. Uncertainty about the future path of the pandemic, associatedcontainment measures and the strength of the economy was significantly affecting investment plans.Non-essential investment spending was most at risk of a sharp pullback. While the turning point inmining investment was now evident, overall business investment was expected to remain weak in the periodahead.
International Financial Markets
Members noted that global financial conditions had remained accommodative amid substantial policystimulus. Government bond yields had remained around historic lows in many economies, includingAustralia. This was partly because monetary policies were expected to remain stimulatory for someyears, and occurred notwithstanding a sharp rise in sovereign debt issuance. Sovereign bond spreads inthe euro area remained low.
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee had signalled that they expected the policy interest ratewould remain very low until at least 2022 and that they would consider new easing measures, if required.Senior Federal Reserve officials had stated that negative interest rates were unlikely to be anappropriate policy tool in the United States. The European Central Bank, Bank of England and SwedishRiksbank had all extended their programs to purchase sovereign and/or private sector assets in June.Many central banks had also refined the various measures they had introduced to provide support forcredit, particularly for the business sector. Members observed that, at the same time, central banks hadcontinued to scale back their operations to support the functioning of financial markets because tradingconditions had largely normalised.
Funding conditions for corporations had remained favourable for most borrowers, particularly those thatwere highly rated. Corporate bond spreads had narrowed a little further, notwithstanding record issuancein the United States and the euro area in the June quarter. Members noted that equity prices in majormarkets had recovered much of their decline earlier in the year, suggesting that market participantswere generally expecting a short-lived decline in earnings. However, volatility in equity markets hadpicked up more recently, partly reflecting uncertainty associated with the increasing spread of thevirus in much of the United States and a number of large emerging market economies. In Australia, equityprices had retraced around half of their earlier decline.
Improved risk sentiment and the extent of policy easing by the Federal Reserve had seen theUS dollar depreciate against the currencies of most economies over recent months. Members observedthat a wide range of advanced economy currencies had returned to levels previously seen prior to theonset of the pandemic. This was also the case for the Australian dollar, consistent with commodityprices and interest differentials having been little changed over that period.
In China, authorities had remained cautious about injecting further monetary stimulus amid concernsabout risk-taking in some parts of the financial system. Nonetheless, the authorities had continued toencourage banks to lend to businesses, particularly small enterprises, and the growth rate of overallfinancing had risen over recent months.
Domestic Financial Markets
Members discussed the Bank's package of policy measures, which had been working broadly asexpected. The cash rate had continued to trade at around 13–14 basis points amid ampleExchange Settlement balances, and investors expected it to remain around this level for some time.Three-year Australian Government bond yields had been stable at the target of around 25 basispoints and government bond markets had continued to function smoothly. As a result, the Bank had notneeded to purchase government securities for some time. Ten-year Australian Government bond yields werelow, albeit a little higher than those prevailing in a number of the major advanced economies. Therehad been further gradual take-up of the Term Funding Facility (TFF).
Funding costs for Australian banks had been at historic lows and the banks had ample access tofunding. The larger banks had continued to indicate that they would draw on the TFF in time as otherfunding matured. Given ample funding from other sources, these banks had not needed to issue seniorunsecured bonds this year. These bonds were also more expensive than the option of obtaining fundingthrough the TFF. Money market rates and rates on deposits had declined to low levels.
Members noted that interest rates on business loans had declined to historically low levels. Largebusinesses had drawn on revolving credit facilities earlier in the year to bolster their liquiditypositions, but had since repaid some of those funds. Lending to small and medium-sized enterprises(SMEs) had remained little changed over the preceding year or more. While the supply of business creditappeared to have tightened, demand for new loans from SMEs had been low given the uncertain outlook andthat other policy initiatives had provided businesses with a source of funds.
Large businesses had continued to tap capital markets, particularly by raising new equity. Membersobserved that listed companies in Australia had raised more equity as a proportion of the overall sizeof the market than had been seen in markets such as the United Kingdom and United States. Equityraisings in Australia had been more common than debt raisings, while the opposite had been trueelsewhere, in particular the United States and the euro area. An important factor explaining thisdifference was that the market for Australian corporate debt is smaller and less liquid than forcompanies in other jurisdictions.
Interest rates on Australian housing loans had declined to historically low levels. Around half of thedecline in the cash rate since February had been passed through to variable mortgage rates. Membersnoted that refinancing activity had risen sharply as borrowers had taken advantage of lower rates andthe strong competition for lower-risk borrowers. Interest rates on new fixed-rate mortgages werenoticeably lower than on new variable rate mortgages, which had led to an increasing share of new orrefinanced loans on fixed rates. While some existing borrowers had deferred their loan payments, payments into offset accounts had remained high. This was consistent with many home loan borrowerssaving for precautionary reasons and having reduced opportunities for spending.
Housing credit extended to owner-occupiers had continued to grow steadily at around the pace ofpreceding months, while housing credit to investors had continued to contract. Housing credit growthoverall was likely to slow in the months ahead, with commitments for new housing loans having fallensharply in May. Members noted that this was consistent with weak economic conditions and the softoutlook for the housing market.
Considerations for Monetary Policy
Members began their discussion by reviewing the monetary policy measures that have been used in otheradvanced economies and their applicability to Australia.
Members discussed how the elements of the Bank's March policy package could have been configureddifferently, noting that there has been variation across countries in the design of these measures. Itwould have been possible, for example, to set lower, but still positive, interest rate targets and tohave purchased a quantity of government bonds above that necessary to achieve the bond yield target.Members also recognised that there was variation across countries in the design of term fundingfacilities and the range of collateral accepted in open market operations.
After reviewing experience both overseas and in Australia, members agreed that there was no need toadjust the package of measures in Australia in the current environment. Members agreed, however, tocontinue to assess the evolving situation in Australia and did not rule out adjusting the currentpackage if circumstances warranted.
Members also reviewed the international experience with other monetary policies and their relevance inthe Australian context, as they had done the previous year. These policies included negative interestrates, foreign exchange intervention, the purchase of private sector assets and also direct governmentfinancing.
Members agreed that the considerations around these options, which had been covered in a speech by the Governor in November 2019, remainedrelevant in current circumstances. All such options entail significant costs and involve very difficulttrade-offs and, for some policies, there are legitimate questions about their effectiveness. Membersagreed that negative interest rates in Australia remain extraordinarily unlikely. They also agreed thereis no case for intervention in the foreign exchange market, given its limited effectiveness when theexchange rate is broadly aligned with its fundamental determinants, as at present. Members reaffirmedthe importance of the longstanding principle of separating monetary policy from the financing ofgovernment, a principle that has served Australia well in practice. Members saw merit in these policymatters being addressed in an upcoming speech by the Governor on 21 July.
In considering this month's decision, members recognised that the global economy wasexperiencing a severe downturn as countries sought to contain the COVID-19 outbreak. Labourmarkets had deteriorated and there had been a sharp rise in unemployment in many economies.Nevertheless, timely indicators of economic activity had generally picked up, suggesting that the worstof the global economic contraction had passed. However, the outlook remained uncertain and would dependupon containment of the virus. Over the preceding month, infection rates had declined in somecountries, but they were still very high and rising in other countries.
Members recognised that the Australian economy was experiencing the biggest economic contraction sincethe 1930s. A very large number of people had lost their jobs, with many others retaining their jobs overthis period only because of government support programs. Nevertheless, economic conditions hadstabilised and the downturn had been less severe than earlier expected. There had been a pick-up inconsumer spending in response to the decline in infections and the easing of restrictions across most ofthe country. However, the nature and speed of the economic recovery remained highly uncertain and, as inother countries, would depend in large part upon the containment of the virus. Uncertainty about thefuture path of the economy as well as the health situation was continuing to affect the consumption andinvestment plans of many households and businesses.
Members agreed that the Bank's policy package was continuing to work broadly as expected. Thepackage had helped to lower funding costs and stabilise financial conditions, and was supporting theeconomy. Government bond markets were operating effectively and the yield on 3-year AustralianGovernment bonds remained at the target of around 25 basis points. Given these developments, theBank had not purchased government bonds for some time, although it was prepared to scale up thesepurchases again, if necessary, to achieve the yield target and ensure bond markets remainfunctional.
The Board recognised that the substantial, coordinated and unprecedented easing of fiscal andmonetary policy in Australia was helping the economy through this difficult period. It was likely thatfiscal and monetary support would be required for some time. The Board remained committed to supportingjobs, incomes and businesses and to making sure that Australia is well placed for recovery. Its actionswere keeping funding costs low and supporting the supply of credit to households and businesses. Thisaccommodative approach would be maintained for as long as necessary.
The Decision
The Board reaffirmed the elements of the policy package announced on 19 March 2020, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.25 per centa target of 0.25 per cent for the yield on 3-year Australian Government bondsthe Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small and medium-sizedbusinessesan interest rate of 10 basis points on Exchange Settlement balances held by financialinstitutions at the Bank.
The Board affirmed that the target for three-year yields would be maintained until progress is madetowards the Bank's goals of full employment and the inflation target, and that it would beappropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rate itself is raised. The Board determined thatit would not increase the cash rate target until progress is made towards full employment and it isconfident that inflation will be sustainably within the 2–3 per cent target band.